
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74524 ***





                                 MANUAL
                                  —OF—
                         Veterinary Homeopathy
                         COMPRISING DISEASES OF
             Horses, Cattle, Sheep, Hogs, Dogs and Poultry
                               AND THEIR
                         Homeopathic Treatment


                                   BY

                       F. HUMPHREYS, M. D., V. S.

                   LATE PROFESSOR, AUTHOR, ETC., ETC.


                  Humphreys’ Homeopathic Medicine Co.

                     Corner William and Ann Streets

                                NEW YORK

[Illustration:

  GOLD MEDAL

  Dr. Humphreys’ Remedies received medals in the International
    Exhibitions of Hygiene.

  Centennial Exhibition Argentine Republic 1910.

  Exhibition of Hygiene United States of Brazil 1909.

  Exhibition of Hygiene Argentine Republic 1904.
]

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1922, by HUMPHREYS’
HOMEOPATHIC MEDICINE COMPANY in the office of the Librarian of Congress,
at Washington.




                                PREFACE


The world owes much to Homeopathy—more probably, than has ever been
told, or will ever be known. It is something to be emancipated from
drugs, from lancets, leeches, blisters and poisons; but it is more, to
be relieved from the fear of them, and to be restored and preserved by
forces mild as love, and gentle as the dews of heaven—forces unknown and
unrevealed, until elicited by the genius of this system.

But these benefits are not confined to the human species. Animals may
enjoy them as well; and heaven knows how much they need them. For to
them the day of sickness is not merely the day of doom, but of suffering
and of torture as well. Ignorance and cruelty seem to have controlled
this branch of medicine—not that men are of necessity careless in regard
to the lives of their animals, or designed cruel as to the measures used
to restore them when sick; but so little real knowledge prevails
concerning their diseases, and so much error as to the proper methods of
cure, that the most absurd and cruel measures almost of necessity
prevail with corresponding results. Some judicious stock owners, taught
by experience the fatality of the common methods of treatment,
notwithstanding the torture and expense, have more humanely, if not more
wisely, abandoned all treatment, preferring to let nature contend with
disease alone, rather than with disease and drugs united. But, thanks to
Homeopathy, there is a better way.

For many years past, Homeopathy has been applied to the diseases of all
domestic animals in Europe, with the most brilliant success. In this
country, and the British Isles, within the last few years, not only have
individual practitioners applied its remedies with equal success, but
some large veterinary institutions, and most of our principal traveling
equestrian troops and menageries, employ it exclusively in all diseases
of their horses, experience having shown them its great value and
curative power, and its immense superiority over every other method. But
the inherent intricacies of the system rendered its general introduction
for the cure of animals impracticable; and though, in the hands of some
practitioners and some veterinary surgeons, it worked wonders enough to
show its astonishing capacities, yet to the masses it has remained a
sealed book.

The principal of Humphreys’ Homeopathy, which has proved so efficient in
popular use, we have now applied to the diseases of domestic animals,
and, from numerous trials, have proved it an entire success. With this
Case and Manual every owner of stock may know every ailment among them,
and can treat it successfully.

Not among the least benefits conferred by this new method is the ease
and simplicity with which the proper medicine is administered. No tying,
bottling, struggling, or choking are necessary. A neat little glass
instrument (the Medicator) is put into the medicine, and takes up the
requisite dose—a few drops—and at the proper moment, is placed in the
mouth of the animal and discharged; in an instant the dose is given, and
an amount of labor is thus saved to the owner, and of suffering to the
animal, which is by no means trivial. Hundreds of animals annually die,
or are rendered valueless from disease and drugging, that may be saved
and promptly restored by the use of the Case of Veterinary Remedies.
Several of our most experienced horsemen have given it their unqualified
commendation, and use it daily in their establishments.

In the execution of this design I have consulted every authority and
drawn upon every resource within my reach, and the experience of each
has been made to contribute to the perfection of the whole, and all has
been combined and compared with my many years of observation, study, and
experience in the practice of Homeopathy. We flatter ourselves that for
simplicity, completeness, and reliability it will commend itself to the
judgement of a discerning public.

                                              F. HUMPHREYS, M. D., V. S.




                              INTRODUCTION


Proper and enlightened attention to the wants of Domestic Animals, is
not only a sentiment of humanity, but a dictate of economy. To know at
least in good part what is the particular ailment of an animal, and to
know also how to relieve it, would seem to be a necessary obligation of
ownership. The least we can return to the many faithful animals given
us, is to provide for their reasonable wants, not only in health, but
also in sickness and disease. Not that every man who owns a horse,
should be necessarily a veterinary surgeon; and yet the way is so simple
that any intelligent person may readily cure a very large proportion,
nay, almost every disease to which his animals are exposed, and yet
bestow upon the subject only a moiety of attention.

Among the many blessings that Homeopathy has conferred upon the world,
not among the least is the immense improvement which it has effected in
the treatment of the diseases of Domestic Animals. With but little
variation, to meet their peculiar habits and susceptibilities, the same
remedies which have been so efficient in mitigating and curing the
disease of men, women and children, have been found equally successful
in arresting the diseases to which all classes of Domestic Animals are
liable. The contrast is even greater. Probably from the fact that
treatment of sick animals has been but little understood, and intrusted
to the hands mainly of ignorant persons, who have pursued the most
crude, cruel and destructive measures, often far more dangerous and
life-destroying than the disease itself, a large proportion of the sick
have died or been tortured to death. But when the same diseases are
subjected to the mild and benign influence of intelligent Homeopathic
treatment, it is found that almost every disease among them is within
control, even the most fatal yielding to its magic influences.

Although at first sight it may seem strange, that animals should be
successfully treated by the mild and apparently insignificant doses of
Homeopathy, yet a moment’s reflection will suffice to give many reasons
why this should be so. Even were it not susceptible of explanation,
experience has abundantly demonstrated the fact, that animals are, if
possible, even more susceptible to Homeopathic treatment than men, and
its success in their case is even more striking and brilliant.

This may be, perhaps, attributed to their more regular habits,
confinement to the same food and drink, absence of excitement, and
freedom from the many articles of food and drink in use among the human
species, which are more or less medicinal.

Owing to these circumstances, animals are very impressible, and the
doses for them need not be so much larger than for the human species. It
seems to be a law of nature, that the more delicate the organism, the
more subject to disease. Wild animals are almost entirely exempt, while
the highly artificial lives of some Domestic Animals render them subject
to numerous ailments and to some very formidable diseases. Yet, as a
whole, animals are far less subject to disease than men, and far more
amendable to cure.

The treatment of Domestic Animals with HOMEOPATHIC REMEDIES, has
numerous advantages.

THE MEDICINES ARE GIVEN AT ONCE and without trouble or annoyance, even
without taking a horse from his team, or a cow from her stall. THEY
PRODUCE NO POISONOUS OR PROSTRATING EFFECT so that the animal rallies at
once, and without loss or deterioration of value. ANIMALS RECOVER MUCH
SOONER and hence are able to resume work much earlier after sickness,
than under any other system. But more than all, it is far more
successful. Slighter diseases yield at once, and often from a single
dose, while the most formidable cases that are almost absolutely
incurable under old treatment, even when well conducted, often respond
to the curative influence of Humphreys’ Homeopathic Remedies, while it
is well known that even when animals recover under the old system of
treatment such have been the ravages of disease and medicine, that their
value and usefulness are generally destroyed.




                             ADVANTAGES OF
                     Humphreys’ Veterinary Remedies
         OVER ANY OTHER SYSTEM, OR MODE OF TREATMENT FOR STOCK.


=I—Humphreys’ Veterinary Remedies, are not an experiment.= They have
been in use among FARMERS, BREEDERS, LIVERY STABLE AND TURFMEN, HORSE
RAILROAD, EXPRESS, MINING and MANUFACTURING COMPANIES, MENAGERIES and
HIPPODROMES, and others handling large numbers of horses and other
stock, with complete success for over sixty years.

=II—You have a remedy for any particular Disease or Complaint. For
Colic=, or =Cough=, or =Founder=, or =Heaves=, or =Pneumonia=, or
=Indigestion=, or =Disease of the Kidneys=, or =Urinary Passages=,
=Strains=, or =Lameness=. You have it in =compact, portable form=. You
know just =what= to do, and =how= to do it.

=III—Their use is free from danger to the Animal.= In the usual
treatment, the medicines are either rank poisons or the most violent
alteratives. It is a common experience, that, if the horse finally lives
through the treatment he is worthless from the effects of the medicines.
Thousands of good horses are every year killed by drugs. In HUMPHREYS’
REMEDY system you are absolutely free _from all such danger_.

=IV—They are simple. Being Remedies for particular diseases= you know at
once what to give. You can scarcely make a mistake. Even if you do, you
have only lost your time, and have not killed the animal. When using the
common veterinary drugs, a mistake is often fatal.

=V—They are readily and easily given.= You need not lose a moment. The
REMEDY is ready just as you want it. With the Medicator you take the
dose from the bottle and place it upon the tongue of the animal, without
loss of time or danger. No bottling, balling, choking, or
strangling—irritating the animal and endangering the owner or his help.

=VI—They act more quickly than any other Medicine.= HUMPHREYS’ REMEDIES
act through the medium of the nerves and the blood, rather than through
the digestive organs. They begin to act before other medicines even
reach the stomach.

=VII—Every Ten Dollars invested in Humphreys’ Veterinary Remedies= will
save you $100.00 and every HUNDRED will save a THOUSAND IN PROPERTY,
besides an equal amount in time, trouble and care.

=VIII—The saving in loss of stock is from one-half to three-fourths.=
This is the testimony of hundreds of horsemen.

=IX=—THE TREATMENT is humane, and if we may be humane as well as
skillful, surely we should prefer it.

=X—Diagnosing the disease and giving of medicine is= such, as any
sensible, faithful man of ordinary intelligence can master without
difficulty.


  We could annex Ten Thousand Testimonials of their efficacy.


                                CAUTION

☞Take care not to confound DR. F. HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY REMEDIES with
the _spawn of imitations_ which the wonderful success of his REMEDIES
has warmed into existence. Imitators have taken _his labels_, _his
doses_ and _directions_, and even _his name_, under which to impose
their IMITATIONS upon the public. Care should be exercised to avoid
impositions. Several parties have reported the _loss of valuable stock_
through the use of these imitations.


                            Doses, How Much?

It is an error to suppose that animals require very large doses of
Humphreys’ Homeopathic Medicines, for experience has shown sick animals
to be very impressible, and easily influenced by appropriate medicine,
and in general, not to require as frequent repetitions as the human
subject. Those who are accustomed to give large and powerful doses of
poisonous medicines in order to produce some revulsive action, such as a
cathartic or sudorific, or even as an alterative, can not from hence
infer the proper quantity required when only a curative result is
desired.

Only experience, hence, can answer the question, How much? And
experience has amply shown that for horses ten to fifteen drops is the
range of doses best adapted in ordinary cases, and that while cattle and
hogs require rather more, sheep and dogs require less than the doses
mentioned. We have indicated in each disease the dose supposed to be
best for that particular case, yet to give two or five drops more in any
given case would probably not be hurtful, while to give a few drops less
would not endanger the curative action for want of the requisite
quantity. The truth is that precision in quantity is not indispensable
to a cure. The doses indicated we think are best, but a deviation from
them is by no means fatal. One physician gives much more and another
many times less, and both are successful. Medicine gives a curative
impulse often as well or better with five or ten drops as with more.
Besides, in giving medicines to animals, from their restlessness,
dodging the head, and other similar disturbing circumstances we can not,
and happily need not, be very positive. Give doses as near directions,
as you may be able, and the result will be satisfactory. The best and
safest rule is always to follow directions given in book, chart, and on
bottles. It is unsafe for you to assume that you know more than the man
who made the medicine and has had many years experience and observation
in using them. Young animals require but half as much as grown ones.


                         Repetitions—How often?

The effects of Humphreys’ Homeopathic Remedies are very prompt and
positive. Often immediate, in cases of colic or other forms of
neuralgia, as the medicine acts at once through the medium of the
nervous system. In other acute cases, such as inflammations, the effect
is equally as prompt but not so openly manifest. The medicine placed in
contact with the nervous papilla of the tongue is at once by means of
this connection conveyed over the entire system, while the stomach being
a secreting rather than an absorbing surface, repels rather than absorbs
a medicinal influence, so that medicines act better for being placed on
the tongue than when they are introduced into the stomach.

_The time to repeat is when the good effect has terminated._ All rules
of repetition are based upon this axiom. Thus, in colic and inflammation
of the bowels, we repeat every fifteen, thirty or sixty minutes. In
inflammation of the lungs, or chest, head, or other noble organ, or in
pneumonia or similar acute diseases, we repeat once in two, three or
four hours. In the yet less severe forms of disease, such as Fevers,
Founder, Strangles, Distemper, Lameness, or similar diseases, a dose
once in four hours, or four times per day, is quite sufficient. While in
Coughs, Heaves, Ulcers, Eruptions, and similar affections, if recent, a
dose morning and night is ample. In old chronic affections, a dose every
day, is better than more frequent repetitions. In most cases these
Remedies continue to act for weeks after having been given if
undisturbed by the use of other medicines.


                        Alternation of Remedies

In general but one medicine is required for a disease, and it may be
repeated from time to time. But cases are often met with where two
Remedies are indicated at the same time, one to meet one phase of the
disease, and a different Remedy to meet another. In all such cases the
two medicines are given _alternately_. Thus give a dose of one Remedy
and then, after the proper interval give the other Remedy, and thus
continue the two _alternately_, at such intervals as the directions
demand. Nor should we be deterred from the use of a remedy in a
particular case, because the name given it indicates a different use,
for a medicine may be curative for a particular disease, and equally so
for a different or even seemingly opposite one.


                        How to Choose the Remedy

In the use of my Homeopathic Remedies nothing can be more simple than
the choice of the Remedy, while in attempting to use the ordinary
Homeopathic preparations, the choice of the remedy is very difficult and
intricate. From an examination of the animal you will have some idea of
the nature of its disease, and will at once turn to the Index and page
in the Manual describing that and similar diseases. Continue the search
until the true description is found, and the proper treatment pointed
out. _If in doubt_ as to the particular remedy always give A.A. It
rarely fails to help, and prepares the way for other remedies when they
are required and gives you time to think and observe. Many good
practitioners always give A.A. first. It is not necessary that all the
symptoms given should be present, as the Remedy in all cases has a wider
range of action than the disease.

If a sufficient length of time has passed to clearly show that no good
has resulted, the case should be looked over again, and a more
appropriate Remedy selected.


                         How to give the Remedy

Not among the least recommendations for the use of my Homeopathic
Remedies, is the ease and facility with which they may be administered.
No tying, struggling, or choking are necessary. The animal should be
approached quietly, usually on the OFF SIDE if the Medicator is to be
used, and medicine placed, if possible, upon the tongue, well
back—thence it is absorbed, and acts at once through the medium of the
nervous system. The simplest medium of doing this is best. For this
purpose the use of the Medicator is best—a small glass instrument
invented by me. It is about five inches in length, made of firm, heavy
glass tubing (_see 4th cover page_), the lower third bent so as to
readily enter the lips. The upper end is funnel-shaped the size of the
end of the finger, and covered with an air-tight rubber cap, so as to
form an air receiver. The Medicator, taken in the right hand, with the
forefinger upon the top or rubber valve, is introduced into the proper
vial, and pressing slightly upon the valve the air is exhausted, and on
removing the finger the fluid is forced up into the tube sufficient for
a dose. A little experience will enable one to take up five, ten or more
drops as may be required. The Medicator thus charged with the dose, can,
at the convenient moment, be inserted just within the lips of the
animal’s mouth, the farther back upon the tongue the better, when a
slight pressure upon the top of tube injects contents, and medicine is
given.

THE MEDICATOR should be held upright; never turned down or held
horizontally; as the air is thus introduced and the medicine may drop
out. Held upright until it is quietly inserted between the lips of the
animal, no such difficulty occurs. Nor is it necessary to push the tube
far enough into the mouth to expose it to the danger of being broken or
crushed between the teeth. The moment fluid from tube comes upon the
tongue the animal will open its mouth, and in an instant the medicine is
injected upon the tongue or in the mouth, and the operation is finished.

In other cases the tongue may be gently hooked out of the mouth with the
finger, and the medicine may be dropped or turned upon it. Horses are
fond of sugar, and the medicine may be dropped upon a small lump, and
fed from hand. After a few times they will call for their sugar when the
owner comes into the stable, at the proper time. With cattle or sheep,
raise the head a little and inject the medicine with the medicator, or
pull the tongue out on one side, and drop or eject the medicine upon it.

Hogs usually, when sick, lie quietly upon the side, and medicine may
hence be injected into the mouth with Medicator, or be given in a
spoonful of sweet milk, poured in between the jaws, or given them to
drink. Care must be taken in giving fluid to hogs, not to forcibly raise
the head, as they are easily strangled—even to death. Dogs may have the
medicine in a little sweet milk, or it may be even turned in through the
nose. Yet the Medicator is an improvement upon all these plans, as it
takes up and discharges the proper dose at once.

N. B.—Take off the rubber cap, and cleanse the Medicator when using it
for different medicines.


                    Housing and Care of Sick Animals

When an animal shows signs of illness, it should be immediately cared
for. The horse, unless in cases of very slight Colic, or other ailment,
when the medicine be given at once, and his work continued, should be
placed in a roomy, convenient and warm stall, well littered, with plenty
of dry bedding, and well blanketed, unless in very warm weather. Cattle,
Sheep and Hogs, as soon as it is noticed that they are sick, should be
separated from the herd or flock, and placed in comfortable, well
littered and especially dry apartments. This is necessary not only to
prevent disease spreading to other stock on the farm, but for the
convenience of nursing them, giving them medicines, and also to place
them in the very best position for a cure. Often a little timely care
and nursing will save and restore an animal, which, if permitted to run
with the stock, and take its chance, would unquestionably be lost. A
sick animal as truly needs attention as a sick child. Not always will
mere nursing restore a sick animal, but it always places it in the best
possible condition to effect a cure, and without it the best medical
treatment will often be fruitless.


                          Diet of Sick Animals

In general, when animals are seriously ill, they are without appetite,
and will take little or no food—nature thus indicating the propriety of
abstinence. But in all cases the food given or allowed should be quite
limited in quantity—one-half, one-third or fourth of the usual quantity,
and only that which is nourishing, easily digested, and generally
relaxing. With these general restrictions, the usual kinds of food may
be permitted, except in the case of dogs, where _only stale bread and
milk_ should be allowed in urgent cases, and but little or no meat, and
no salted or spiced food in any case. After the more urgent symptoms of
disease have passed over, and the animal is recovering, we should be
careful and not give full feed, as a relapse may thus easily be
provoked, and prove very stubborn and dangerous.

At least half an hour or an hour should intervene after taking a dose of
medicine before the animal should be fed as the system is more
susceptible then than at any other time.

To evacuate the bowels—injections of water, soap and water, or salt and
water are always allowable, and may often be used with great benefit.
They are usually administered without difficulty, in no case injurious,
and should one fail to produce an evacuation, another or more may be
repeated, until the result is accomplished.


                         How to Feel the Pulse

In the horse, this is best done by placing the finger on the artery,
where it passes over the lower jaw, about four inches below its angle.
Place the forefinger on the side of the lower jaw at its angle, and
trace the jaw along gently towards the mouth. Some four inches below the
angle a notch will be found, in which the artery passes over the jaw,
and the throbbing of the pulse will be readily felt. Some attention may
be required as the pulse beats in health slowly, and often apparently
indistinctly.

The pulse makes in the healthy horse from thirty-six to forty-two beats
per minute; in spirited lighter horses the latter, and in heavy older
horses the former. When the pulse reaches fifty to fifty-five, there is
some degree of fever. Seventy-five will indicate a dangerous condition,
and few horses will long survive a pulse of one hundred. Care should be
taken not to excite an animal before or while examining the pulse, as it
may thus readily be increased ten or fifteen beats to the minute, and
mislead as to the true condition.

In cattle the temple is the best place to feel the pulse and usually
runs forty-five to fifty beats per minute.

In sheep and hogs the femoral artery which extends across the inside of
the thigh is most easily felt. This should run seventy to eighty for
both sheep and hogs.

In dogs the pulse may be felt by placing two fingers on the inner side
of the knee. Dogs run from 90 to 100 per minute.

The heart usually beats four or five times to each breath the animal
takes (when in condition of rest). There is also a variation in normal
temperature according to the animal as follows:

             ANIMAL    NORMAL RESPIRATION  NORMAL TEMPERATURE
          Horse         8 to 10 per minute 100.4 to 100.8 F
          Cattle       12 to 15 per minute 101.8 to 102 F
          Sheep, Goats 12 to 20 per minute 103.6 to 104.4 F
          Hogs         10 to 15 per minute 103.3 average F
          Dogs         15 to 20 per minute 100.9 to 101.7 F

As this Veterinary Manual may fall into the hands of some who are not
acquainted with its use, a few practical hints may be of service.

=1st. Follow the directions.=—Read and learn what the disease or
condition is.—Then give the remedy _in the doses_, and _at the intervals
directed_, as near as may be. Don’t think you know more about the doses
or _how much_ to give, or how often to give it, than the man who
originated the system and wrote the book, and whose rules and
observations are the result of very large experience.

=2d. Don’t mix the Remedies= with other medicines. They won’t act if you
mix them up with other things; or bring the patient under the influence
of other drugs, however harmless you may suppose them to be. The sure
way of safety and success, is to _trust_ to the _Remedies alone_. You
will not improve the case by resorting to other medicines or other
measures. If the patient does not improve as rapidly as you desire, a
little rest will do no harm, and the kindly reaction may come on later.

=3d. Don’t be in to great haste.=—Medicines must have time to act and
time to cure. In some cases, such as colics, neuralgias or nervous
pains, the evidence of good action is prompt—almost immediately. In
other slower, less pronounced, not so decided.

When you see the patient relieved.—_less pain_,—_more quiet_,—_more
natural_,—_easier_, then you know that the remedy is _acting
curatively_, and _don’t interfere with it_, by giving new doses or other
remedies or medicines. Simply _let the remedy act_. _Hurrying does not
hurry the cure._ When a good action has begun it will continue faster
when quietly permitted to expend its action, than if doses are
multiplied upon it. The time to repeat the dose is when the action of
the former has ceased or begun to decline. The patient is in more danger
from your doing too much, than too little, after a good action has been
set up.

=4th.= Disease of the bones, joints and ligaments, only get well slowly.
So of old chronic affections—such as “Spavin,” “Founder,” “Ringbone,”
“Wind galls,” “Warts,” or other blemishes. A new action has to be set up
in the implicated part, often a process of absorption and of reformation
of tissue, and _time_ must be allowed for these changes, through which
only a cure can be made. Sometimes a good reaction is only produced
after some days or even weeks use of the remedy. Such is nature’s way of
cure and you cannot hasten it. So your true interest and true philosophy
is, act _patiently_, _perseveringly_, if you would act _successfully_.

=5th. The action of Humphreys’ Remedies continues a long time.=




                                PART I.
                           Diseases of Horses




                               CHAPTER I.
               DISEASES OF THE SKIN and SUBJACENT TISSUE


                        Abscess—Ulcers—Fistulas

An abscess is a collection of matter. Any tumor softening, or in other
words coming to a head, forms an abscess. They are usually the result of
injuries, such as a blow or contusion, or may be occasioned by a thorn,
nail or splinter entering the flesh. In the more severe cases these act
in connection with a constitutional predisposition or peculiar state of
the blood.

SYMPTOMS.—A hot and painful swelling; in the earlier stage, hard, and by
degrees softening or fluctuating in the center, and gradually
approaching the surface, attended with more or less heat and fever,
according to its situation and nature.

Abscesses which penetrate deeply along the sheaths of muscles and
tendons, or even to the bones are termed FISTULAS. Shallow abscesses are
known as ulcers, and these may be mild, readily healing, and secreting a
healthy, thick, cream-like pus; or ill-conditioned, unhealthy, secreting
a thin sanious discolored matter, and healing with great difficulty.
Such are the general characteristics of all abscesses, wherever located,
and their situation and extent mark their relative importance and
danger.

TREATMENT.—During the inflammatory stage or before softening, while
there is merely a hard, more or less hot and painful tumor, we should
endeavor to disperse it without its softening. To this end, give three
times per day, ten drops of A.A., and also bathe the tumor as often with
HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL which will frequently disperse it.

But if the swelling increases and fluctuates, or a yellowish spot is
observed in its center, denoting the presence of matter, it should be
lanced at once, in the most depending portion, and the matter drawn off,
and fifteen drops of the I.I., should be given morning and night to
facilitate the healing. Apply the VETERINARY OIL to the cut or open sore
with end of the finger, three times per day, to facilitate the healing.

For ULCERS or SORES, apply the VETERINARY OIL, as above.

In fistulas where the canal is long and crooked, or runs into cavities
of pus, it may be laid open with the knife, so as to heal from the
bottom, or better, the VETERINARY OIL may be injected daily, with a
small syringe, or the OIL may be inclosed in a _gelatine capsule_ and
gently pressed down into the bottom of the cavity, after having pressed
out the accumulated matter. The use of the capsule (which may be had for
a trifle at the druggists, or from this Company), is the safest and most
convenient.


                     Abscess of the Poll, Poll Evil

Is often from neglect a very formidable disease. It is generally the
result of severe injury upon the top of the head, such as the chafing of
the bridle or halter, pressure, or a blow against the manger or stall,
or frequent hanging back against the headstall.

SYMPTOMS.—At first a tumor forms at the polls or junction of the head
and neck. It soon becomes hot, tense and painful; the horse carries his
head low; looks to one side; eats but little from the pain of chewing,
especially if the food is hard. If the tumor is not dispersed, it comes
to a head, either discharges externally, or the matter failing to come
to the surface, sinks downward, burrowing along beneath the surface
among tendons, ligaments and bones, forming deep and obstinate fistulous
ulcers.

TREATMENT.—Before the tumor has softened, give the A.A., fifteen drops
three times per day, keep the horse on low diet, and bathe the swelling
frequently with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL. This course will usually
disperse the swelling or should it fail to do so will limit it to the
smallest possible extent.

If the tumor has come to a head, is soft or fluctuating, lance it at
once, evacuate the contents, and give fifteen drops of the I.I., morning
and night, apply HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL three times per day to the
sore. For old neglected cases apply the VETERINARY OIL, and give I.I.,
daily.


                     Fistula of the Withers—Sweeny

This disease very much resembles Poll Evil in the textures involved and
the difficulty in curing it. It begins with an inflammation of the
connecting tissues of the spinous processes of the dorsal vertebræ and
the ultimate formation of an abscess. Being confined by the fascia or
ligamentous structures, the matter cannot find its way to the surface,
but forms sinuses or pipes, and by the force of gravity, burrows down
among the muscles which connect the shoulder with the trunk. Sometimes
it consists of a cyst filled with a serum, and then is easy to cure. As
the muscles of the withers are connected with all the movements of the
neck as well as the back and legs, the disease rapidly increases, and
the inflammation extends; the shoulder becomes lower, the ligaments,
cartilage, and spinous process are involved, and extensive mischief
ensues.

CAUSE.—A badly fitting saddle, and most commonly a side-saddle, which,
pressing on the spinous processes of the vertebræ, produces first
soreness and subsequent inflammation.

SYMPTOMS.—Swelling and tenderness either on the top of the withers or a
little on one side of the spinal process at that point; and in a short
time fluctuation under the finger. Should the skin have been much
bruised, a circular portion sloughs out and leaves an unhealthy looking
sore, from which there is a discharge, and on further examination with a
probe we find a cyst from which there is only one outlet, or we find
fistulous ducts (“pipes,” in farriers’ language) leading in various
directions. In many more advanced cases we only discover a hard tumor on
the withers, which will neither suppurate nor disappear by resolution,
and to which, although coming under the head of Fistulous Withers, the
term is evidently inappropriately applied.

TREATMENT.—First remove the cause by taking off and quite altering the
bearing of the saddle. If the swelling is recent and does not fluctuate,
thoroughly rub in the VETERINARY OIL, repeating the operation every day,
giving a dose of B.B. also morning and night. If a cyst exists and
fluctuation is perceptible, it must be opened at the most dependent
portion, and the matter drawn off, and the part rubbed with the
VETERINARY OIL, and a portion of it injected into the sack or opening
every day. If long pipes or sinuses exist, they must also be opened and
the VETERINARY OIL injected. Give also, morning and night, I.I. daily.


                                 Dropsy

While dropsy is not a common disease in the horse it is sometimes met
with; particularly in horses which are fed on the refuse from sugar
factories and distilleries.

It may be caused from improper feeding, or may be only a symptom of some
other disease, particularly diseases of the heart, lungs, liver and
kidneys.

Dropsy is a morbid accumulation of watery fluid confined to certain
parts of the body. The disease is divided into varieties corresponding
to the respective localization of the accumulated water, as for
instance, anasarca (water in the skin); ascites (water in the abdomen);
hydrothorax (water in the chest).

SYMPTOMS.—In the first form (anasarca) it is first noticed on the lower
parts of the body, as the legs, under surface of the chest, etc. The
skin is swollen and doughy to the touch and retains the impression of
the fingers; but is neither painful nor of abnormally high temperature.

In ascites there is a gradual enlargement of the abdomen and when
pressed upon, the fluid can be felt to flow from side to side and the
part with the water gives a dull sound on being struck. Breathing is
quicker and impeded and the appetite diminished, but there is no fever.

In hydrothorax the symptoms are much the same except that it takes place
in the region of the chest instead of the abdomen.

TREATMENT.—It will generally be relieved by giving the H.H., in doses of
fifteen drops three times per day for trifling cases, or ten drops every
three hours for the more severe ones. After a free discharge of urine is
established, giving the medicine three times per day will be sufficient.


                                 Eczema

(See also Mange page 23)

In the horse, eczema represents practically all forms of skin disease
except the parasitic and is seen in the following forms and regions.

1—A form seen in hot weather and variously known as herpes, lichen,
summer or saddle mange, and heat pimples. This occurs under the harness
where sweating is most profuse, at first as scabby pimples, after which
the hair sticks together and falls, leaving scaly bare patches.

2—Then there is a form of scaly eczema which attacks the head, neck,
shoulders, elbows, etc. This is a chronic form, with the production of
branny scales with thickening of the skin accompanied by itching.

3—A pustular form which attacks chiefly the skin under the mane and
tail. The skin is raw and weeping, while the hair mats together in
masses and falls and there is a tendency to the chronic scaly form.

4—Eczema attacking the legs is known as mallenders and sallenders if on
the back of the knee, or the front of the hock, while if above the
heels, in the bend of the pastern it is known as grease. This is
characterized by heat, swelling and redness, followed by a vesiculated
weeping surface with the formation of a greasy, offensive discharge,
scabs and cracks in the skin, followed by loss of hair. Sometimes the
irritant secretion gives rise to production of fungus wart-like
granulations, known as “grapes” accompanied by great thickening of the
skin and swelling of the limbs.

Eczema probably comes from both external and internal causes. Among the
external causes are improper grooming and cleansing of the skin,
exposure of the animal to constant rain and the use of irritant soap.
Grease may be caused by clipping the hair about the fetlock in cold
weather and cleaning before the hair has entirely dried.

Among the internal causes are hereditary disposition, improper diet and
use of drugs.

TREATMENT.—First clean the sores, removing all dirt, scabs, etc. For
this purpose olive oil is better than water as soap and water are apt to
cause further irritation. (If about the tail or mane, clip the hair
around the sores). Apply Zinc Ointment at night and morning. Give A.A.
three time per day for two days, then I.I. instead of the A.A.

When in the form of “Grease” on the fetlocks, remove the hair from the
sores and cleanse them well. In bad cases the application of a bran
poultice cleanses them beautifully. Keep the legs as dry as possible.
Feed with relaxing or green food, bran mashes, and less stimulating
food, especially in the early stage, and give fifteen drops of A.A. Keep
the legs as free from dirt as possible. If the horse is not worked let
him have exercise daily, and each night and morning after the leg is
cleaned apply Zinc Ointment.


                               Hidebound

This condition is not a disease of itself, but a mere symptom of some
other disease, most frequently of the stomach; such as a disordered
stomach; poor food, or long exposure to rough, stormy weather. It not
unfrequently exists in connection with Glanders, Grease, Founder or old
disease of the lungs.

SYMPTOMS.—It manifests itself by the hair looking rough and unthrifty,
without its natural smoothness and gloss; and the skin feels hard, firm
and fixed to the flesh.

We can most successfully treat it by ascertaining and removing the cause
upon which it depends. But in the absence of any special indication, we
may give with the best success a dose of fifteen drops of J.K., each
morning, and the same of I.I., each night. A few days treatment will
generally produce a most marked improvement.


                                 Mange

(See also Eczema page 21)

Mange is a disease of the skin which has much the same appearance as
eczema but is caused by parasites while eczema is not.

There are three forms of mange in the horse.

1—Sarcoptic mange caused by a burrowing mite which feeds and propagates
in the lower layers of the skin. This form is usually found on the head,
neck, shoulders and outer parts of the body.

2—Dermatodecic mange caused by sucking mites which live on the outer
layers of the skin and suck up serum and lymph. This form is usually
found on the inside of the thighs, root of the mane and tail, sheat,
etc.

3—Symbiotic mange caused by scale eating mites which live and feed on
the surface of the skin. This form is usually found on the feet and
pasterns.

The last two varieties of mites can be seen by the naked eye but better
by a magnifying glass. The first variety can be seen only by a glass and
that with difficulty due to their burrowing under the skin.

One should be careful to distinguish mange from eczema as the origin and
treatment of the two diseases are quite different, although the eruption
looks much the same in each case.

1—Eczema is much more common in the horse than mange.

2—In mange there is a more definite boundary to the patches than in
eczema.

3—In mange the itching is much more intense.

4—The actual discovery of the parasites by the aid of the magnifying
glass is of course the final test.

TREATMENT.—Consists of clipping the hair around the infected patches,
then cleaning them with oil or glycerine containing five per cent of
creolin or lysol. Then apply a thick lather of green soap and leave on
for twenty-four hours. This is to soften the scabs and prepare the skin
for the actual remedy. For this purpose sulphur ointment (equal parts of
sulphur and lard) is an old standby or a three per cent solution of
creolin or lysol is good. The remedy must be thoroughly rubbed with a
brush into the infected parts and when rubbed off by the animal
reapplied for a period of a week. Then wash off and repeat the treatment
two or three times.

In addition to this the horse should be removed from the other animals
and all stalls, blankets, etc., that he has used should be cleaned by
boiling water and a five per cent solution of creolin and lysol. This is
necessary in order to destroy the mites which remain on such articles
and which might infect the other animals or reinfect the horse.


                              Swelled Legs

This affection is of frequent occurrence in horses, and is more
especially observed in coarse and badly groomed animals. The hind legs
are most subject to it, although it frequently extends to the fore legs.
Sometimes from metastasis of disease from other parts, the legs swell to
an enormous degree, and it is attended with some degree of heat,
tenderness, and peculiar lameness. The pulse is quickened, and there is
evident fever. In such cases there is some inflammation of the cellular
tissue, and an effusion of fluid forming the swelling. In these cases
when there is heat and tenderness, a few doses of fifteen drops each of
A. A., for FEVER, will soon relieve the lameness and swelling. If the
legs are swelled without being lame or painful, the I.I., should be
given morning and night, with careful grooming and exercise, this will
soon reduce the swelling. If the swelling is accompanied with SCANTY
URINATION, the H.H., given three times per day is the proper remedy for
the difficulty. Sometimes swelled legs are merely the result of a change
of feed, and hence often occur in spring and fall, or when horses are
taken from pasture and confined in close stables. Consult also GREASE or
SCRATCHES.


                         Swelling of the Teats

Sometimes from cold or injury, the teats in mares are subject to
inflammatory swelling. A few doses, ten drops each, of A. A., for FEVER,
will relieve, and if the parts seem quite tender, bathe them with
HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL or apply the VETERINARY OIL.


                                Ringworm

Ringworm is a disease caused by a vegetable parasite, or fungus, which
lives on hair follicles and the hair itself.

SYMPTOMS.—It makes its appearance most frequently on the seat of the
saddle, on the croup or flanks and sometimes on the head. The spots
range in size from a dime to a half dollar and usually form a fairly
regular circle. The hair has fallen out or is broken off and there is a
scaling of the skin inside the circle. The surrounding hair can easily
be pulled out. Itching is generally absent.

TREATMENT.—Same as for mange. (See Mange page 23).


                                  Lice

Horses taken up from a straw yard, with long, shaggy coats, in poor
condition, are sometimes found infested with lice.

CAUSE.—Contagion.

SYMPTOMS.—The animal is seen continually biting his sides and quarters,
rubs himself against walls and posts, or anything within his reach,
denuding the skin of hair in patches and making it bleed. On close
examination we have no difficulty in discovering the lice in bare
patches.

TREATMENT.—The horse should be removed from the other animals. The
stalls, blankets, etc., that he has used should be thoroughly cleaned by
boiling water and a five per cent solution of creolin or lysol, to
destroy the lice which will cling to stalls, blankets, etc.

The horse should be washed with green soap and water and kerosene (Coal
Oil) should be applied night and morning for two days and then removed
by soap and water. This must be done three times at intervals of a week,
in order to kill the new generations of lice which hatch from the eggs
in about six days.


                               Tubercles

These small, sluggish swellings are caused by friction, contusion, cold,
stings of insects, internal disease, etc.

TREATMENT.—If they are the result of external violence, HUMPHREYS’
MARVEL WITCH HAZEL or VETERINARY OIL, applied externally, is beneficial.
The I. I., may be given with advantage morning and night.


                                 Sponge

This term is given to a round, spongy excresence on the knee, generally
caused by some external injury. It is at first a hot, painful swelling;
then becomes a cold, hard, indolent tumor. It sometimes occasions
considerable itching and emits purulent matter.

TREATMENT.—If sponge arises from some injury, the VETERINARY OIL should
be well rubbed in, two or three times a day; or applied morning and
night; at the same time, also administer I. I., morning and night.


                                Sweating

Sometimes on very moderate exercise, horses sweat to excess. It is often
the result of weakness, poor food or some internal condition. Give J.K.,
a few times, in doses of fifteen drops, morning and night.


                           Tumors, Swellings

Any unusual or morbid growth or enlargement may be termed a tumor, and
when one is found upon any part of an animal, care should be taken to
ascertain, if possible, its nature and cause. They are variously named,
according to their locality and the nature of their contents.

Sometimes they are globular or conical, or again flattened, or again
pedunculated (having a neck). Some are quite firm and hard, others
spongy, and others contain fluid.

Encysted Tumors (so called because the enlargement is closed in a sack)
are frequent, more or less round, movable beneath the skin, painless,
and sometimes attain to a considerable size. They are the result of some
internal cause not easily defined.

TREATMENT.—In all cases where a tumor or swelling is hot or painful,
give A.A., every two, four or six hours, in doses of fifteen drops,
according to the urgency of the case. Keep the animals on low diet and
thus seek to disperse it. If caused by external pressure or injury,
annoint the part frequently with VETERINARY OIL. If the tumor,
notwithstanding the treatment, has softened, grows whitish at some
point, painful and smaller, open it, then treat it as an ulcer, giving
I.I., morning and night.

In case of _cold tumors_ or hot tumors, after the heat has been reduced,
simply give I.I., at night, or noon and night, and the J.K., in the
morning, in doses of fifteen drops, until the tumor is dispersed or the
condition favoring the production is destroyed. Encysted and fatty
tumors will generally have to be taken out by the knife and the opening
annointed with VETERINARY OIL and again neatly brought together to
prevent a scar.


                                 Warts

Warts are so well known as to require no description. Certain horses and
young animals are most subject to them. They vary in size and
appearance, are smooth or shaggy, pedunculated or have a large base and
some are soft, moist or spongy. They sometimes arise after chafing or an
injury, but depend essentially upon an internal cause.

TREATMENT.—Give I.I. in doses of fifteen drops, every two or three days
for a few weeks, this should cause their entire disappearance. Apply
also daily the VETERINARY OIL, scraping off the rough outside of the
wart with the thumb nail before or while applying the OIL.




                          CHAPTER II.—PART I.
                     MECHANICAL INJURIES AND WOUNDS


The treatment of injuries and wounds is a branch of Veterinary Surgery
of the utmost importance to the owners of horses, for accidents are of
every day occurrence. We shall, however, not be able to devote so much
space to the subject as some would deem desirable.

Flesh Wounds may be classified as _Contused Wounds_, when there is an
injury inflicted on the surface of the body by mechanical violence
without rending the skin; _Incised Wounds_, when such an injury is
inflicted by a clean cutting instrument; _Lacerated_ or _Jagged Wounds_,
when the parts are torn and the lips of the wound are irregular; and
_Punctured Wounds_, when the injury is deep rather than broad, and the
effect of piercing as by a stab.


                            Contused Wounds

DEFINITION.—Wounds are said to be “contused” when the skin, although
bruised, is not cut through or broken; they are followed by the usual
symptoms of inflammation, namely, redness, swelling, heat and pain.

CAUSES.—These can be best understood by one or two illustrative
examples. A horse gets the collar chain around his heels at night when
he becomes fast, and, in struggling to free himself, he bruises and
excoriates the hollow of the pastern. Next morning he is found very
lame, with swelling and great tenderness of the parts, but there is no
rent in the skin. He has what is called “Contused Wound.” Or, another
cause of injury commonly occurs in cavalry stables, where the horses are
separated from each other by an iron bar, over which one of them manages
to get one of his hind legs. In struggling to get back, he bruises the
inside of his thighs, and probably his belly as well. Next day we find
him with his leg considerably swollen, lame, and tender on pressure,
from “Contused Wounds.” Other causes are kicks from horses, blows from
bad-tempered grooms, and falling on hard ground.

TREATMENT.—Apply the VETERINARY OIL to the part two or three times per
day, and give the first day or two, the A.A., three times per day, after
which, an occasional dose of I.I.


                             Incised Wounds

DEFINITION.—Incised wounds are those in which a clean cut is made
through the integuments or parts underneath, merely dividing textures
without lacerating them, and are generally caused by some sharp
instrument.

TREATMENT.—In such cases it is necessary to bring the lips of the wound
together, and retain them so by what are called sutures, the best of
which is an ordinary pin passed through the skin a quarter of an inch
from the edges of the wound, whose lips are then kept close together by
the further addition of a small piece of tow passed over, under and
around the pin, forming a figure thus $, after which the point of the
pin may be cut off with a pair of scissors. These pins, or, as they are
called, “twisted sutures,” may be placed one inch apart from each other.
Most Veterinary Surgeons use what is called the “interrupted suture,” as
follows: A curved needle, armed with a strong thread, well waxed, is
passed through the skin on each side of the wound, when the ends of the
thread are drawn together and tied in a common knot. As many of these
stitches are to be made as the length of the wound renders necessary,
but they should be about three-quarters of an inch apart. These sutures,
as a general rule, should be allowed to remain as long as they will; but
should an effusion of serum or matter take place in the interior of the
wound, the lower or most dependent one should be taken out, and the
fluid allowed to escape; and then, but not before, warm applications may
be applied. Exceptional cases, however, do occur when, from the extent
of the injury, considerable swelling takes place about the third day,
and constitutional disturbance intervenes. In these cases the sutures
may be removed; but in the majority, the swelling must be looked upon as
a natural consequence attendant on the formation of lymph, which may be
seen oozing from the lips of the wound, and which is necessary to glue
them together, till the small vessels pass from side to side and form a
permanent bond of union. Always dress the wound and keep the edges of
the opening moist with the VETERINARY OIL, applying it from day to day,
to prevent inflammation, suppuration and to promote healing by “first
intention.” The interrupted or thread suture is preferable for wounds
about the head, as the horse would probably tear out the pin by rubbing
it against the rack or manger. Previous to applying sutures, we should
remove all foreign bodies and clots of blood from the wound, and oil
every part well with the VETERINARY OIL, and give A.A. four times a day.

_Hemorrhage_, although causing great alarm to the uninitiated in
veterinary science, is generally a matter of very little consequence,
except a large artery is divided, as the bleeding will soon stop without
our assistance. But should the blood come in jets, be of a bright
scarlet color, and not stop in a reasonable time, we should either seize
the open mouth of the vessel with forceps and pass a ligature around it
or apply a compress of tow and a bandage. Cold water dashed on the part,
or HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL will frequently have the desired
effect.


                       Lacerated or Jagged Wounds

DEFINITION.—By these are meant that description of injury to the soft
parts where the skin and subtextures, instead of being simply divided,
are torn asunder and present a jagged and irregular appearance, and are
often much bruised.

CAUSES.—They are caused by mechanical injuries, such as hooks and nails
in stables, or by carriage poles or shafts running into a horse.

TREATMENT.—Our first object is to remove all foreign bodies from the
wound, and to cut off all lacerated portions, whether of skin, muscle or
tendon, which cannot be retained in their original position. Then all
grit or sand must be washed away by dashing cold water on the wound,
should there be much hemorrhage; or bathing it with warm water, should
the bleeding be inconsiderable. Having thus produced a tolerably even
and clean wound, and removed those parts which we know would be removed
by sloughing, we assist nature by sewing up such portions of skin and
muscle as are not too much injured to preclude the hope of their growing
in their original position, although we may abandon all hopes of the
wound uniting by the first intention. This we accomplish by thread
sutures, as in the case of incised wounds, but with this difference,
that we do not bring the lips of the wound together, but at once have
recourse to hot applications and bandages wherever they can be applied.
The use of the latter is to preserve the lacerated parts in their
original position, to exclude air, and to prevent the water washing away
the lymph, which is necessary for the filling up of the wound;
consequently the bandage should not be removed for a few days, except
that the swelling renders it actually necessary to do so. The warm
application reduces the tension in the part, favors circulation and the
exudation of lymph, and by its soothing effects prevents that
constitutional disturbance which is so much to be dreaded in this class
of wounds. In about a week the inflammation will have partially subsided
and suppuration will most probably have taken place, when we remove the
bandage and discontinue the hot application, merely letting a little
water run over the wound to remove superfluous matter. It is undesirable
to use a sponge, because it would remove the lymph at the same time and
expose the small vessels to the atmosphere, which are busily engaged in
repairing the injury, which, acting on them as an irritant, causes them
to secrete exuberant and unhealthy granulations called “proud flesh.”
For the same reason, unless the matter is very plentiful and has a bad
smell, it is better not to apply even water, or in any way remove the
lymph.

The best possible dressing for all such injuries is HUMPHREYS’
VETERINARY OIL, which should be applied to all the raw or cut surface
before being sewed or bound up, and then kept applied to the raw
surface, both to prevent inflammation and to promote healing, and to
hasten the process of cicatrisation, or the skinning over of the wound.
Apply the VETERINARY OIL twice per day. Should the granulations rise
above the surrounding skin, or “proud flesh” appear, VETERINARY OIL is
still the best application, and will soon reduce the unhealthy growth
and induce a natural healing.


                            Punctured Wounds

DEFINITION.—These have small openings externally, but are usually deeper
and of a much more serious nature than others. Because from their depth
they are liable to implicate blood-vessels, nerves, viscera, and other
deep-seated parts of importance. And because the parts which they
traverse are stretched and torn, and consequently disposed to inflame
and suppurate. And because matter, when formed, has no free exit, and is
liable to burrow extensively. Finally, because foreign bodies may be
carried into great depths without being suspected, and create long
continued irritation, and because they are most liable to be followed by
Tetanus.

CAUSES.—These wounds are caused by any sharp pointed instrument, such as
a pitch-fork, nail or scissors, or by stabs or thorns, bayonet or sabre
thrusts.

TREATMENT.—Our first object is to remove all foreign bodies, such as
splinters, thorns, or balls, should it be a gun shot wound. Should the
puncture not be in the neighborhood of a joint, or penetrating a tendon
or bursal cavity, it is then generally advisable to enlarge the orifice
of the wound by passing a sharp knife to the bottom of it, and convert
the punctured into an incised wound, when it must be treated by
injecting VETERINARY OIL in all cases where it is possible to do so, and
in all cases by keeping the OIL applied to the open wound or sore until
it is entirely healed. Give also A.A. morning, noon and night; after
which give I.I. morning and evening.

When a tendon is punctured and the thecal fluid escapes, the nature of
the injury in no way differs from an open joint in the mode of treatment
to be pursued, which will be found fully explained in the Section on
open joint, page 44.


                        Laceration of the Tongue

This wound may be caused by a high port bit, by the forcible and
careless administration of balls and drinks; by the end of a halter
being passed over the tongue to guide the horse instead of a bit; by a
fall when the tongue is between the incisors; by rough, long or
irregular teeth; by thorns, sharp bones, needles, etc.

SYMPTOMS.—Slavering from the mouth and inability to feed will lead to an
investigation of the mouth, when the laceration can be plainly seen.

TREATMENT.—Foreign bodies should be removed. The horse should be fed on
green food, if it can be procured, and no bit put in the mouth for some
days. The best application is the VETERINARY OIL applied daily. If
ulcers form, I.I. should be administered also.


                Saddle Galls—Warbles—Sitfast—Serous Cyst

DEFINITION.—When a saddle or collar has galled the skin of the back and
shoulders, effusion takes place into the tissue underneath. If a small
circumscribed tumor is the result, we call it a “Warble”; or, if a large
flat swelling with abrasion of the skin be found, the name of “Saddle
Gall” or “Harness Gall” is given to it.

CAUSES.—These disorders often arise from a ill-fitting saddle or collar,
also by removing the saddle too soon. After a march soldiers are not
allowed to strip their horses until they cool under the saddle.

TREATMENT.—Apply the VETERINARY OIL morning and night, and give I.I. as
often, until the healing begins; then give J.K. morning and noon, and
I.I. at night.


                                Staking

In leaping fences or gates, the belly of the horse is sometimes impaled
and wounded. The extent of the injury is not always apparent outwardly,
and can only be ascertained by careful examination with the finger.
There may be no wound in the skin, but the muscle underneath may be
injured and torn, and the bowel may enter the part torn; or the stake
may pierce the abdomen and a portion of the bowel may protrude
outwardly.

TREATMENT.—In the former case, a well fitting pad must be made and
bandaged on; the bandages or pad being well oiled with VETERINARY OIL.

In the latter case, the horse must be kept quite still, and treated
where he is. The protruding bowel must be gently and carefully washed
from all blood, dust and grit with warm water, then oiled and replaced
by very gentle pressure. The lips of the wound must then be oiled and
drawn together and kept in place with pins. A pad saturated with the
VETERINARY OIL should then be placed on the wound and kept in place by a
bandage around the body. If the bowel itself is wounded, it must be
stitched with catgut ligatures, and then replaced. If this is
impracticable at the time, a pad and bandage should be placed on injured
part until surgical aid can be obtained.

As there is danger of inflammation, A.A. should be given at two-hour
intervals, and also a dose of I.I. each day. The horse should be kept
very quiet and fed sparingly on soft food.


                              Capped Elbow

This is a swelling formed at the point of the elbow, consisting of an
infiltration of bloody serum, and thickened skin. It may be the result
of a blow, but is most generally caused by the horse in so lying that
the calks of the shoe press upon the elbow joint. In some cases,
inflammatory action sets in, and the tumor softens and is discharged, or
if the pressure is continued, the swelling becomes hard and firm.

TREATMENT.—When the injury is recent, apply hot water three times per
day, and afterwards apply the Veterinary Oil. Alter the shoe by removing
the calks and smoothing the shoe, as far as possible, to prevent any
further irritation. Should it have become soft and matter formed it
should be treated as an abscess.


                              Capped Hock

This form of injury most frequently results from kicking or some similar
violence, and manifests itself either as a swelling at the point of the
hock, which consists of an effusion of bloody serum and thickened skin;
or the swelling bulges out on each side of the hock, making the
enlargement more prominent at the sides. This is found to consist of an
enlargement of the bursa or small bags, which contain the lubricating
fluid for the part, and over which the sinews glide.

TREATMENT.—Give ten drops of B.B., three times per day. Wash the part
with hot water morning and night, applying the VETERINARY OIL afterwards
as for capped elbow. After the heat and irritation are reduced, careful
hand-rubbing and the use of I.I., at night will do much to disperse the
enlargement of the bursa.


                                  Curb

At the back of the hock, three or four inches below its point, an
enlargement or swelling arises which has received the name of _curb_. It
is a strain of the ring-like ligament which binds the tendons in their
place, or of the sheath itself. It comes on in consequence of a violent
strain of the flexor tendons, or from a blow, kick, or contusion upon
the part. It is most likely to occur in cow-hocked horses, where the
hocks are turned inward, and the legs form a considerable angle outward,
as in such cases the angular ligament must be continually on the stretch
in order to confine the tendon.

When it first occurs, the swelling may not be great but is attended with
warmth, pain and lameness, the leg being moved with caution and
awkwardly.

TREATMENT.—In recent cases, frequent bathing of the part with the
HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL diluted one-half water, allowing the horse
to rest, and give A.A. at first, then B.B., three times per day. The
application of HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL, morning and night will be
better after the heat and swelling have mostly subsided. Rest is
absolutely essential. If prematurely put to hard labor it is very likely
to return again. If the curb is permitted to run its course, the acute
stage will pass off leaving a hard, cold tumor, which may materially
interfere with the motion of the joint. All old cases require B.B., once
or twice daily, for some weeks.


                                Docking

By docking the tail of a horse, his shape and external appearance are
sometimes improved, yet the operation is not without its consequences,
such as inflammation, nervous irritation, fistulous ulcers, tetanous,
etc. It is hoped that the time is not distant when this barbarous and
senseless custom will be abolished, and the stern hand of the law laid
upon every man who thus mutilates God’s creatures. Yet if the senseless
operation is done, dress the wound with HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL, which
keep applied to the wound. Give first fifteen drops of A.A., and after a
few hours, the same of B.B., which may be repeated from time to time to
relieve the soreness and inflammation.


                               Fractures

Fractures of the bones of the horse occasionally occur in consequence of
some severe blow, contusion, fall, or other injury. They are
discoverable from the _difference in shape_, _swelling_, _lameness of
the part_, and especially by the “CREPITUS,” or grating sound, which
occurs from moving the two fractured ends of bone together. In all
doubtful cases, this crepitation is the reliable criterion. In the more
palpable cases, the distortion, loss of the use of the part, and
extensive swelling, remove all doubt.

Among the most common are fractures of the ribs, forming a swelling over
the place, which is very sensitive to pressure. Of the pelvis, rendering
one hip lower than the other. Of the leg, rendering movement and use of
the limb impossible, the point below the fracture swinging about
useless.

Fractures are _simple_ where a single break occurs in one bone,
_compound_ when the surrounding parts are lacerated, and _comminuted_
when bones are broken up or fractured in different directions.

The treatment of all fractures rest upon very simple principles. Bring
the broken parts to their natural position, keeping them there until
they unite, the more perfectly this is done, the more perfect will be
the result. Unfortunately, from the weight of the animal, and often his
intractability, this is not always easy or even possible. But, on the
other hand, nature will eventually heal even the worst cases, requiring,
it is true, a longer time, and leaving behind very sad traces of her
faulty workmanship. So that in treating a fracture, all these elements
should be taken into consideration.

_Fracture of the ribs_: Bathe the swelling with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH
HAZEL, and the parts will soon unite.

_Fracture of the haunch bone_ cannot be reduced, but nature will ere
long heal it, though with some distortion, one hip will be lower than
the other.

_Fractures of the leg_, from the weight of the animal, are extremely
difficult to manage. It can only be done by suspending the animal by
stout canvas passing under the belly and attached to rollers on either
side and by means of pulleys raising him up so that the feet just touch
the ground, the canvas being supplied with heavy bands, before and
behind, to keep the body securely fixed in the canvas. The fractured
ends of the limb should then be carefully adjusted and the limb wound
well with a roller-bandage, then a pair of iron splints, grooved so as
to fit the limb, and well wadded with tow; the splint that is behind two
or three inches longer than the foot, should be securely bound on. The
whole internal bandage should be bathed with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH
HAZEL and kept wet with it, from time to time, for a week. This will
subdue inflammation and hasten the union of the parts. After eight days,
the splints should be removed and the limb examined, and again replaced,
to remain five or six weeks, at the end of which time the splint may be
removed and a simple bandage and lighter splint retained until the cure
is perfected in some six weeks longer, when the animal may be trusted to
use his limb. If the ends are in proper apposition and maintained there,
the union will be perfect, with but little swelling or deformity.

The general treatment of all fractures is to place the parts in
apposition, keep them there by proper splints and bandage, and keep the
place wet with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL until the heat and swelling
have subsided. Give also a dose of A.A., every two hours, for the first
three days, to reduce the heat and fever; then alternate the B.B. with
A.A. a dose every three or four hours during the day, to promote
reunion.


                  Sprains or Strains and Dislocations

Sprains of various joints or parts occur which are more or less grave or
serious, depending upon the extent of injury or the joint involved. If a
bone is displaced it is termed a dislocation. The joint becomes painful,
swelling soon ensues, and on comparing the joint with its fellow, we
perceive the distortion; the limb is longer or shorter, and the animal
moves it with great difficulty or not at all. If the bone is not moved
from its position, but the ligaments are merely injured, or torn, or
joints otherwise bruised, it is termed a sprain. The swelling in this
case is often as severe and even more so than in case of actual
dislocation. Yet the accident is not so serious, because in cases of
horses and cattle, a dislocation is not always curable, and if the joint
be replaced the danger of new dislocation is far more imminent than
though it had never occurred.

CAUSES.—Sprains and dislocations occur from false steps, slipping,
leaping across ditches, sudden springing, violent effort in drawing a
load, or sudden turning, or from falls, blows, kicks, contusions, etc.

TREATMENT.—In all such cases the indications are simple, yet the
execution of them is sometimes very difficult. For sprains, bathe the
parts with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, to keep down the swelling and
inflammation, renewing the application from time to time at intervals of
two, four, or six hours, according to the urgency of the case, and give
six doses of A.A. three hours apart, then B.B. morning, noon and night.

=Sprains of the Fet-Lock.=—A sprain of this joint sometimes occurs,
manifested by heat, swelling, and lameness more or less decided, and
especially manifested when the horse is moving on uneven ground. When
recent, bathe the part with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, and saturate
a bandage with it, wrap it up, moistening it from time to time, and
giving B.B., two or three times per day, fifteen drops at a dose. The
pain and lameness will gradually abate.

=Luxation of the Patella, or Stifle.=—Under the influence of a severe
blow, a sudden leap or strain, the patella, or knee-pan is sometimes
displaced. The animal holds his leg stiff and extended, cannot rest on
it, and when obliged to walk, draws it along. This displacement of the
patella is called being STIFLED. The displacement can be reduced by the
aid of sufficient help, and placing a side-line with a hopple on the
pastern of the affected limb, and drawing the hind leg forward, the
surgeon will then, with both hands, bring the bone to its place.

Often the reduction is effected of itself if the horse makes the
slightest effort. The part should be bathed in HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH
HAZEL, as the ligaments are always injured; give fifteen drops of B.B.
three times a day.

Injuries of the stifle, bruises, strains, etc., often occur, and should
be treated by bathing the part with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, and
giving the animal the above Remedy for injuries.

Sprain of the Psoas Muscles.—This occurs from drawing heavy loads on
soft ground, or from horses’ hind legs slipping back on ice, or from
jumping a bank.

SYMPTOMS.—Difficulty in bringing up the hind legs when made to move, and
sometimes inability to stand. It may be mistaken for spinal injury, but
the difference is as follows: When the spine is injured, complete
paralysis takes place, whereas in Sprain of the Psoas Muscles the animal
is able to kick and to extend the leg with great force. Examination _per
rectum_ will leave no doubt as to the nature of the injury, for pain on
pressure, and swelling of the muscles, will be evident.

TREATMENT.—Give B.B., morning and night.

=Sprains of the Muscles of the Haunch.=—The gluteal muscles are
sometimes sprained by violent exertion. The injury will be followed by
effusion, swelling, and stiffness of the quarters, and afterwards by a
gradual wasting of the muscles, which can be perceived by standing
behind the animal and comparing the quarters.

TREATMENT.—Warm applications, A.A., and, after the inflammation has
somewhat subsided, the B.B. four times per day.

=Hip Joint Lameness.=—This lameness may be produced by a sprain of the
round ligaments, or gluteus externus muscle; but it more frequently
arises from a sprain of the tendon of the gluteus maximus at its
insertion into the trochanter major.

SYMPTOMS.—A dragging and rotary motion of the leg, pain on pressure, and
a swelling which fills up the natural furrow, so well defined in well
bred horses, formed by the semi-membranous and gluteus externus.

TREATMENT.—This is the same as for Sprain of the Muscles of the Haunch.

=Sprain of the Stifle Joint.=—This is not very common, but when it does
occur it may be easily recognized by the swelling, which, being
superficial, can be easily felt, and by the pain caused by pressure. The
action is also peculiar, the animal is unwilling to advance the hind
leg, and drags it after him in trotting.

TREATMENT.—Warm applications frequently applied, and HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL
WITCH HAZEL morning and evening. As soon as the inflammation subsides
the warm application must be discontinued, and a dose of B.B. given
three times per day.

=Sprain of the Hock.=—The tendons and ligaments of this joint are all
liable to be sprained in leaping and galloping through heavy ground. The
tendons of the gastrocnemii internus, or those which retain the latter
in its place, sometimes become lacerated, and allow the cap formed by
the gastrocnemii tendon to slip off the os calcis to the outside. In
such an accident we cannot replace the tendon, but with rest and warm
applications the animal may become fit for road-work.

The tendon of the flexor pedis perforans, which passes down the back of
the hock, is occasionally sprained, and the sprain is followed by a
thickening, and sometimes ossification of the tendon. The extensor pedis
at the front of the hock may also be sprained, and this occurs just
where the tendon passes under the inferior annular ligaments, and, being
accompanied by distension of the bursa, may be mistaken for sprain.

The ligaments connecting the bones of the hock may suffer from an
ordinary sprain, which, if discovered and properly treated, may be
easily cured. But, unfortunately, the sprain is seldom discovered until
the inflammation has wrought an important pathological change in the
tarsal ligaments, whereby their structure loses its elasticity and
becomes converted into a cartilaginous or bony substance. If this takes
place in the inner part of the hock, we call the disease Spavin; but if
on the posterior part we call it Curb. These are usually classed as
diseases of the bone, but they more properly belong to this category, as
they are an effect of long continued and neglected Sprain.

Give fifteen drops of B.B., three times per day.


                     Cutting, Brushing, Speedy-Cut,

Over-Reach and Tread.

These are names given to bruises caused by one foot striking against
another foot or leg.

=Cutting or Brushing= is caused by a foot striking the opposite fetlock
or cannon bone. It may occur before or behind; usually behind. It arises
from defective structure of the legs, or from wasting of the legs in
horses badly fed, so that they are brought abnormally near to each
other.

=Speedy-Cut.=—The inside of one or both feet usually strikes the fetlock
joint of the opposite foot in passing it; but sometimes the cannon bone
is struck just below the knee; the bruise thus caused is called
“Speedy-cut.” It occurs during fast action, generally in horses with
badly shaped legs. It is more dangerous than common cutting, because the
pain is more severe and the shock to the system greater, so much so that
sometimes the horse falls as if he were shot. Examination may discover a
small bare place, partially concealed by adjacent hair, or a contusion,
or an abrasion of the skin, or a scab on the inside of the cannon bone.
In bad cases the periosteum may be swollen and the bone itself enlarged.

TREATMENT.—This should be the same as for common cutting; but in all
probability the only effectual remedy will be the construction of a
speedy-cut boot, with a pad on the inside of the leg reaching from the
knee to the fetlock, kept in position by buckles, and resting on the
fetlock joint.

=Treads and Over-Reaches.=—These are names given to a wound between hair
and hoof, inflicted either on the fore coronary substance by the shoe of
the hind foot, or on the hind leg by another horse treading on it. Cart
horses may inflict the injury on themselves with the calk of the shoe.
These wounds are sometimes difficult to heal in consequence of the
difference in organization of the parts injured, the exterior being
highly vascular, but the interior cartilaginous.

TREATMENT.—Every portion of detached _horn_, _hair_ or _skin_ must be
removed and the wound cleansed and dressed with the VETERINARY OIL
placed on soft tow and bound up with broad tape. On the third and every
subsequent day the dressing may be removed, but warm applications and
poultices must be avoided. In cases of neglect or ill-treatment the
suppurative process may have become established, and the warm
applications may be necessary. If neglected the disease may end in
Quittor.

In all cases of INJURIES or BRUISES, give A.A., and B.B. in alternation,
two doses of each per day.


                              Broken Knee

This is a very vague term and may imply simply to a bruise, an abrasion
of the skin, or a division of the tendons or of the capsule of the
joints.

CAUSES.—Mechanical, such as falling or striking the knee against some
hard and sharp substance.

SYMPTOMS.—There may be a simple bruise, without perforation of the skin,
which, though not strictly speaking a broken knee, may be conveniently
regarded as such; the knee is hot, swollen and painful, and sometimes
hair is removed, or there may be abrasion of the skin, or it may be cut
through, torn and jagged, and the underlying tissues more or less
injured, the sheath of the tendon being exposed. If no glairy fluid
issue at the time the joint is not open, and there is no cause for
uneasiness about anything except the blemish which may remain, but which
will generally be very slight if suitable treatment be adopted. A more
serious form of Broken Knee is where it is bruised, cut or lacerated,
and opened down to the joint, accompanied by the escape of clear
synovial fluid, “joint oil,” like the white of an egg;

TREATMENT.—The horse’s head must be racked up for a few days or placed
in cradles, to prevent his biting the wound. In broken knees where the
skin and subtextures are very much contused, and where such a quantity
of sand has become imbedded that suppuration is a necessary consequence,
it is well to put on a turnip or carrot poultice (but never bran, for it
acts as an irritant). A leg of a woolen stocking should be drawn up over
the knee and fastened around the leg at the lower part with a piece of
tape, then, from above, the space in front of the knee can be filled
with mashed turnip; the upper part of the stocking can then be fastened
as the lower. The poultice may be repeated morning and evening for about
three days, when suppuration will most probably be established, and no
further treatment be necessary unless the granulations become too
luxuriant, when the VETERINARY OIL may be applied, but not too freely or
too often. In a few days the scab will fall off, and if cicatrisation
has not taken place, the process may be hastened by washing the part
three times a day with tepid water, or better, with the HUMPHREYS’
MARVEL WITCH HAZEL. Give B.B.


                      Stings of Bees, Hornets, &c.

Sometimes where a horse has been tied near a swarm of bees, if sweaty or
offensive to them, the swarm has been known to attack him, producing
pain, inflammation, swelling, and sometimes death. Hornets are as bad or
worse. Apply freely HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL. Give A.A., fifteen
drops, and repeat it every hour.




                          CHAPTER III.—PART I.
                     DISEASES OF THE FEET AND LEGS


                                Lameness

The adage “No roof, no house,” is matched by “No foot, no horse,”
because in either case the value of the thing is measured by the part
that is wanting. So lameness or its absence is the essential part to be
looked after in a horse. Fortunately it is not always necessary to
decide in our practice the precise point, structure, tendon or muscle
involved in order to cure, but it is always desirable. Hence the
following points are suggested.

If the lameness has come on _suddenly_ during a drive or work, it
suggests some accident, or other very recent cause, such as _picking up
a nail_ or a _stone_, a _bruise of the sole_, an _over-reach_, or a
_strain_ of a _tendon or joint_. If it has come on _slowly_ or
_gradually_, it would suggest some more deep-seated or constitutional
cause.

If it occurs of having been out, or worked in cold rains, or after work
standing uncovered in a cold chill wind, it suggests _rheumatism_ or
rheumatic lameness, or _laminitis_, “founder of the feet.”

An examination must always be made quietly. If the horse is excited you
are liable to be put upon the wrong track. If the _fore feet_ are
affected the hind feet will be likely to be brought far forward in order
to take the weight off the sore place. If one fore foot _points_ or is
advanced some inches beyond the other, it suggests some difficulty in
the heel of that foot or back part of that limb; while, bending the knee
and fetlock, and resting the foot or the toe without advancing it,
suggests a disease of the shoulder or elbow. In all cases of lameness of
_one foot_, that one will rest more lightly on the ground, and be raised
more quickly than the other. In exercise when one limb is affected, that
foot comes to the ground less heavily than the other, and the head and
fore part of the body are elevated, when it comes down and drops again
when the sound foot comes down. With lameness in _both_ fore feet the
_step is short_, and the stroke on the ground weak, the shoulders stiff,
head raised, and hind feet brought unnaturally forward. In lameness on
_one side behind_ the rising and falling of the hip on the affected side
is more marked than on the sound side. When _both sides_ behind are
involved, the fore feet will be kept well back under the animal to
relieve the weight. With these hints in mind the location of the trouble
may be usually ascertained and the treatment by external applications
facilitated. Consult also the special form of lameness or disease which
the examination has indicated as the directions or hints given therein
may be valuable as _sprain_, _rheumatism_, _bruises_, _corns_, _stifle_,
_founder_, _spavin_, _splint_, _etc_.

TREATMENT.—In general, when the point of difficulty is known, and if
recent, the place swollen, or heated, apply HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH
HAZEL diluted one-half with water, two or three, or more times per day.
In severe cases, put on a compress wet with diluted MARVEL, which renew
as often as it gets dry, and give A.A., if there is much heat or fever
in the part, a dose say four times per day. When the heat has subsided,
or if there is no special fever or heat apparent, give B.B. as often at
first, and later or in more indolent or chronic cases a dose morning and
night. Later, and especially if the lameness is worse on first morning,
give I.I. in place of B.B., or alternate the one morning and the other
night.

THE VETERINARY OIL, may be used after the use of the MARVEL, or when
there is local swelling, bruise, or any _chafing_, _cut_, _scratch_, or
_ulceration_ or for _bruised_ or _broken hoof_ or _corn_. Apply it
daily.


             Laminitis, Inflammation of the Feet or Founder

This is one of the most frequent diseases of the horse, and one in which
the resources of my HOMEOPATHIC REMEDIES are very efficient. The
sensible lamina or fleshy plates on the front and sides of the
coffin-bone, are, like all other vascular structures, very liable to
inflammation, particularly from violence or long continued action of the
part. Hence, standing long in one position, as in sea-voyages; battering
or bruising the feet in severe or long journeys; sudden changes from
heat to cold, or from cold to heat, acting directly oil the feet;
standing in snow or cold water after a journey, are the more common
causes of this disease. It sometimes occurs as a mere transition of the
disease from some other part, and occasionally from _excess of food or
indigestible food_, or _food when heated_. Many cases of so called
FOUNDER are really only attacks of _Acute Rheumatism_; hence consult
what is said on that disease, and compare the two chapters for a better
understanding of the subject.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease generally begins with a shivering, shaking chill;
the flanks heave; the breathing becomes quick and labored; the pulse
full and frequent; the horse shifts his feet from one place to another;
lies down and rises frequently, but does not paw the ground nor kick his
belly; he will sometimes place his lips on the fevered feet, as if to
tell where his pain is; he places his hind legs under him, as if to take
the weight of his body from the fore-feet; he moans or groans from the
severity of the pain and at last lies down, unable to stand upon the
inflamed feet. The feet are intensely hot and painful. If one foot is
taken up, he can scarcely stand upon the other and may tumble down. He
does not like to get up from the ground, and is moved with difficulty
from one place to another. If the disease be not arrested, matter may
form inside the hoof, which even may be thrown off.

The disease may exist in a more chronic form, coming on by degrees, and
eventually resulting in the ruin of the horse.

It is more common to see it in a milder form than the first mentioned
presenting the following symptoms: The horse is feverish, out of
spirits, refuses to eat, cannot raise his limbs without evincing pain,
trails his feet along with difficulty; cannot readily be made to go
forward, or backward scarcely at all. In the stable, horses bring the
four feet near together, and there is no little difficulty in making
them relinquish this attitude.

TREATMENT.—In the more severe cases, the shoes should be removed from
the feet, and the hoof pared down until the horn yields to the pressure
of the thumb. Give the horse rest, and allow him to lie down, wrap the
hoofs in cloths soaked in water, and renew them from time to time. If
the disease is from the feet having been battered by long driving or
riding, bathing them with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL will be of great
value. In some cases, a cold poultice, made of mashed turnips or
carrots, is of excellent service.

The remedy is B.B., of which a dose may be given every three hours, in
acute cases. In recent cases, when there is _fever_, _decided lameness_
and _heat of the foot_, and indeed in almost every case, you may better
begin with A.A., of which give a dose every two hours, and after three
or four doses, alternate with B.B., as often as every two hours, and
after the force of the disease has abated, the B.B., may be continued
alone at increasing intervals, until entire restoration.

When the disease is clearly traceable to _over-feeding_, the B.B. and
J.K., may be alternated from the first, every three or four hours, in
doses of fifteen drops.

In case of chronic founder, the B.B. should be given, a dose of fifteen
drops, each morning and night, and the treatment continued for some
time. An occasional dose of J.K. will be useful as a constitutional
intercurrent remedy, and may be given at noon, while the B.B. is given
morning and night.


                       On the Formation of Joints

Joints are formed of bones which fit into each other by unequal
surfaces, whose cavities and eminences mutually correspond. As the
roughness of the bones would prevent their moving freely without
friction, we find an intervening smooth elastic substance called
cartilage, which not only obviates this inconvenience, but in a great
measure takes off the jar that would otherwise ensue when the horse
moves on hard ground. To render the motion still easier, we find the
cartilage covered with a fine synovial membrane, secreting a fluid of an
albuminous and oily character, which acts in the same capacity as oil to
machinery, namely, to prevent friction.

Besides the membranous connection of bones which enter into the
formation of joints, there are strong, flexible substances of a fibrous
texture called ligaments, which are the chief bond of attachment, and
support the lower joints; while others are further strengthened by
muscles and tendons. Bursæ mucosæ are small closed sacs which surround
the tendons wherever there is friction; they are analogous in structure
to the synovial membrane, and secrete a similar fluid.


                               Synovitis

DEFINITION.—Idiopathic or constitutional inflammation of the synovial
membranes. The inflamed membranes never extend beyond a certain size,
nor do they burst, nor do they terminate healthily without treatment,
but remain in the same condition from year to year. The inflamed
condition is most frequently observed at the hock, when it is called
Bog-spavin and Thorough-pin. But it is also found affecting the knee and
fetlock, and in the latter case is sometimes confounded with Windgalls,
which are inflamed bursæ mucosæ.

CAUSES.—Rheumatic Fever; exposure to heat and cold; also friction from
quick work on a hard road; sprains.

SYMPTOMS.—Lameness quickly succeeded by swelling of some joints, not of
the surrounding fibrous texture, as in true Rheumatism; the swelling in
this disease is in the synovial cavity, and the effusion is at first
generally serous and unattended by the fever which ushers in the
muscular or fibrous Rheumatism. As the inflammation proceeds, coagulable
lymph may be thrown out and the joint be permanently enlarged, or, from
adhesions, the horse be left with a stiff joint.

GIVE A.A., four times per day at first, then B.B., morning and night.


                   Ulceration of Articular Cartilage

The inflammation in the synovial membrane sometimes extends to the
cartilage, covering the ends of the tibia or astragalus. In such cases
there is a diminution of the synovial secretion, also ulceration and
wearing away of the cartilage, and a polishing of the surface of the
bone, which has been erroneously called a porcelaineous deposit. We have
seen this ulceration of the cartilage, and even caries of the bone, in
the navicular more commonly than in the bones of the hock; but not a few
cases of occult lameness in the hock may be attributed to it. Give B.B.
two or three times per day.


                            Windgalls—Puffs

In the region of the joints, and wherever friction is likely to take
place, we find the tendons supplied with little sacs (_bursæ mucosæ_)
composed of membrane similar to the synovial, and secreting in health an
oily fluid from their internal surface, in very small quantities; but
when the tendons become strained, or increased action is set up in them
from over-exertion, nature comes to the rescue by increasing the bursal
secretion, and we then perceive a slight elastic tumor, called
_Windgall_ or _Puff_.

CAUSES.—Tendinous sprains or over-exertion of any kind, and long
continued friction from quick work on hard roads. Low, marshy pastures
seem to have a tendency sometimes to produce a dropsical effusion in and
around the joints of young horses, very similar to the enlarged bursæ
from hard work; but they soon yield to constitutional treatment.

SYMPTOMS.—Soft, elastic, circumscribed swellings, at first about the
size of a nut, but eventually becoming hard and much larger, which
appear in the neighborhood of some of the joints, such as the knee,
hock, or fetlock. To the latter, however, the name is usually
restricted, although equally applicable to the former; so that when we
say that a horse has Windgalls, we mean that he has above, or on each
side of, the fetlock, or back sinew, one or more elastic tumors, usually
unattended by lameness or any active inflammation. The seat of these
bursal enlargements is either between the perforatus and perforans
tendons, or between the latter and the suspensory ligament. There is,
however, another fetlock Windgall found on the front of the joints,
between it and the extensor tendon; and a similar swelling occurs at the
supero-posterior part of the knee from the distension of the bursa,
between the perforatus and perforans tendons.

PATHOLOGY.—These enlargements were formerly supposed to contain wind,
and so obtained their absurd name; but, from what has been already
stated, the reader will perceive that they consist in an increase of
bursal fluid similar to joint oil, and in a majority of cases do no
harm, but are rather to be considered as a beautiful provision of Nature
to obviate the baneful effects of friction from over-exertion of the
muscles and tendons. Morbid changes, however, do occasionally take place
in the bursæ, either from inordinate increase of their contents setting
up inflammation in their tissue, or from an extension of the
inflammation to contiguous parts, in which not only the bursal sacs, but
also the lining membrane of the tendinous sheath, participate, when we
find the puffy swelling extending up the leg, above the ordinary seat of
Windgall, and very tender on pressure. The effect of this inflammation
on the bursæ mucosæ is to cause a thickening of the membrane and a total
change in the contents of the sac; the fluid, instead of being a
straw-color, becomes reddened from the effusion of blood, which, after
death, we find clotted and of a dark color. Lymph also is occasionally
effused, giving the tumor a firm, hard feel, which, from calcareous
deposits, produces lameness.

I.I., given morning and night, often clears up these blemishes
wonderfully.


                               Seedy Toe

This disorder, frequently a sequel to laminitis, often arises without
any assignable cause. It can sometimes be attributed to the clip of the
shoe pressing on a hoof predisposed to the disease from deficiency in
its natural glutinous secretions, whereby the horn becomes dry and loses
its cohesive property, and is unable to resist the pressure from the toe
clip, which a healthy hoof would do with impunity. It may also be
consequent on gravel or dirt working in at the edge of the sole.

SYMPTOMS.—The horn at the toe (of the fore-feet of troop and riding
horses, but frequently the hind feet of cart horses) becomes “seedy,”
and crumbles away like so much saw-dust or the dry rot in wood; while at
the junction between the wall and sole a fissure will be apparent,
leading upward between the outer and inner crusts of the wall, sometimes
extending up to the coronet, and in old cases laterally, so that there
is some difficulty in finding a piece of horn sufficiently sound to hold
a nail, and side clips become necessary in keeping the shoe on.
Percussion on the wall of the hoof with a hammer will show to what
extent the separation has taken place.


  TREATMENT.—The whole of the crust, as far as it is separated from the
  horny laminæ underneath, must be cut away, and the foot bound up with
  tar, tow, and broad tape. VETERINARY OIL applied to the coronet will
  hasten the downward growth of the wall. Keep the horse standing in
  clay, daily anointing the hoof with VETERINARY OIL. Both means have
  been successfully tried. Give J.K. morning and night.


                        Navicular Joint Disease

This disease is far more frequent than is usually supposed, and many
horses are ruined by it, the lameness being generally referred to the
shoulder or to some other part not at all in fault.

Behind and beneath the lower pastern bone in the heel of the horse, and
behind and above the heel of the coffin-bone, is a small bone called the
navicular, or shuttle-bone. It is so placed as to strengthen the union
between the lower pastern and coffin-bone, and to enable the flexor
tendon which passes over it to be inserted into the bottom of the
coffin-bone and to act with more advantage. It thus forms a kind of
joint with that tendon. There is a great deal of weight thrown on this
bone and from this navicular bone on the tendon, and there is
considerable motion or play between them in the bending and extension of
the pasterns.

It is easy to conceive that from sudden concussion or from rapid and
over-strained motion, and at a time when, from rest and relaxation, the
parts have not adapted themselves to the violent motion required, there
may be excessive play between the bone and tendon, and the delicate
membrane which covers the bone or the cartilage of the bone, may become
bruised, inflamed and injured, or destroyed, and that all the painful
effects of an inflamed and open joint may result, and the horse be
incurably lame. Numerous dissections have shown that this joint thus
formed by the tendon and bone, has been the frequent and almost
invariable seat of these obscure lamenesses. The membrane covering the
cartilage becomes inflamed and ulcerated; the cartilage itself is
ulcerated and eaten away, the bone has become carious, and bony
adhesions have taken place between the navicular and pastern and
coffin-bones, and this part of the foot has become completely
disorganized and useless.

SYMPTOMS.—The degree of lameness is various; the horse may show lameness
the first hundred steps, or the first mile or two, and then less or
scarcely at all; he is inclined to “point” or keep the affected foot in
advance of the other when standing; he may show lameness on stone or
pavement and not on turf or ground; if both feet are badly affected, the
horse favors his heels, has short action, and wears away the toes of his
slices, leaving the heels undiminished in thickness; the hind feet may
be kept well under him to diminish the pressure upon the fore-feet; in
the stable, he is mostly lying down; heat of the foot and heel,
especially the heel.

TREATMENT.—In the earlier stages when there exists only irritation and
inflammation, and no changes of structure or disorganizations have yet
occurred, the A.A., together with cold applications kept to the foot
will be sufficient. Give a dose of fifteen drops four times per day.

In more extreme or advanced cases, the sole should be pared down and the
quarters rasped, and shoe worn without nails on the inner quarter, to
unbind as far as possible the imprisoned bone, and the foot kept
anointed with the VETERINARY OIL, and the use of B.B., the main remedy.
These will be successful in the incipient or milder stages of the
disease and will vastly benefit old or chronic cases.


                       Sand Crack, Quarter Crack

That is a separation of the fibres of the hoof from above
downward—rarely crosswise. The usual treatment is to drill two holes
through _each side of the crack_ and then pass copper or iron wire
through them. Both ends of the wire are then drawn and clinched down and
fastened in the same way as the nails in shoeing. The crack itself is
then to be filled with cobbler’s wax after having been thoroughly
cleaned out. Give also, ten drops of the J.K., morning and night, to
promote the growth of the hoof.

A yet better method is to properly prepare a _horse shoe nail_ by
cutting _bards along in it_, _from head to point_. Then drive the nail
from one side of the crack through to and beyond the other at least half
an inch from the crack. The clinching of the point of the nail will
drive the bards back and firmly fasten them, and the head and point may
be filed down and smoothed off. A long crack should have two nails. The
shoe should be so fitted and the hoof so pared away, as to _take the
bearing off from the cracked portion_, and as the hoof again grows down,
it should be again _cut away between the hoof and shoe with a saw_, so
as to keep the bearing of the cracked part of the hoof free. You thus
rivet the broken parts together, and by taking off the strain allow the
crack to grow out, and heal up. Of course a horse with a quarter crack
should only be put to the most moderate work, if any, as violent
exercise or hard work will be sure to aggravate and increase the
difficulty, and may render a cure impossible.

Quarter crack only occurs when some brittleness or defective horny
growth is present. Correct this defect by giving the J.K., fifteen
drops, morning and night, and apply HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL to the
crack as often.


                                 Corns

A corn is a bruise upon the sole of the foot at the angle between the
wall and the bar, and has this resemblance to the corn in the human
subject, that it is produced by pressure and results in lameness. It may
be caused by contracted feet; cutting away the bars: too thick-heeled
shoes or weak, flat feet; dirt getting between the shoe and heel of the
foot; or from not having the foot sufficiently pared out.

SYMPTOMS.—The pressure arising from these causes produces an irritation,
congestion, soreness, and even extravasation of blood under the horn,
with often a reddish appearance and a softer feel than other parts of
the sole. The place is painful when pressed upon, the horse flinches and
is more or less lame. In bad cases matter may form, and unless a vent is
made, may underrun the sole or appear at the coronet in the form of a
Quittor.

TREATMENT.—In most cases, simply apply the VETERINARY OIL to the sore
place night and morning after having properly cleansed the foot. See
that the shoe does not press upon the sore place, but has its bearing
upon the outer crust of the hoof. If matter has formed under the corn,
the dead horn may be removed and a vent made and a poultice applied to
soften and discharge the matter, after which apply the VETERINARY OIL
until the soreness is removed. Give I.I. mornings and J.K. at night, and
keep the OIL applied to the surface. Change the poultice and dressing
each night and morning. In a few days the foot will be ready to shoe in
the usual way, using, however, a leather sole to keep out the dirt. If a
quittor has formed, it should be treated as such.


                           Prick in the Foot

Sharp substances, such as nails, glass, pointed stones, or similar
substances, not unfrequently penetrate the foot in traveling, or the
shoe may be partly torn off, and the loosened nail be thrust into the
foot, or a nail may go wrong in shoeing.

When a sharp pointed object is picked up on the road, it may enter the
toe of the frog and wound the navicular joint, or the flexor, at its
insertion into the pedal bone, and let out the “joint oil,” in which
case there is danger of permanent injury. The wound may lie further
back, and be in the bulbous heels or cushion of the frog; in this case
there is less danger.

In shoeing, the nail may be driven too near the laminæ, or even wound
them; in the latter case the horse _will flinch_; in the former he may
not feel the nail till he _puts his foot to the ground_. If on the day
after shoeing he walks lame, the foot is hot to the touch, the horse
flinches when the crust is tapped with a hammer, especially where there
is a nail, it may be assumed that the shoeing is at fault.

SYMPTOMS.—Lameness, with heat in the foot and tenderness on pressure. In
some cases, no matter will be found, but in others a black serous or
purulent discharge will issue from the wound when opened, and the sole
will probably be underrun.

TREATMENT.—If there is simply _heat of the foot_ and _lameness_, remove
the shoe, see that all nails or parts of nails, or other foreign
substance is taken out. Apply and keep the foot wet with HUMPHREYS’
MARVEL WITCH HAZEL and give the A.A., once in three hours, to reduce the
inflammation. If matter has formed, LET IT OUT. Apply the VETERINARY OIL
to the hole or orifice, and give A.A. and B.B., in alternation, a dose
four times per day, and later the B.B. and I.I., to dry up the
discharge. If the horse is required for work before the horn has covered
the wound, a leather sole and the VETERINARY OIL dressing must be used.


                                Quittor

This is a deep, narrow ulcer, opening upon the coronet, and leading into
an abscess in the foot. It may be caused by treads, or overreaches, or
corns, but most commonly from prick of a nail or other sharp substance.
It is attended with more or less lameness; heat and pain in the foot,
and discharge of matter from the open wound. But if it has been caused
by the matter from a corn, the coronet above the heel will have upon it
a hard, painful swelling, which afterward becomes softer and larger.

TREATMENT.—If the quittor arises from a wound of the sole or prick,
after the wounded part has been pared out and poulticed, then with a
probe gently find out the direction and number of pipes, and with a fine
syringe, inject HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL of full strength into the
opening, two or three times per day. The VETERINARY OIL is better if you
can get it into the opening.

When it arises from a corn in the heel, and matter has got into the
coronet, the swelling must be cut into and the discharge let out; then
poultice night and morning, inject the MARVEL as before, rasp down the
wall of the hoof until it yields to the pressure of the thumb, and put
on a bar-shoe. Roll a bandage around the coronet to keep the dirt out
from the quittor.

If there is some considerable heat and fever, the A.A., may come in play
giving fifteen drops four times per day. But the I.I., should be given,
fifteen drops three times per day, at first, and then morning and night.


                                 Spavin

This is an affection of the tendons, ligaments, and bursa connected
with the hock. From a strain, violent exercise, or similar cause, an
increased action is set up in these parts which glide upon each other,
irritation results and the parts enlarge. Or, an exudation of serum
occurs, tinged or not with blood, which may be absorbed afterward or
remain for a long time a soft movable tumor; or by degrees an ossific
or bony deposit takes place, resulting in a firm, hard, bony tumor.
These several stages or degrees of the same common affection have been
termed _Bog-Spavin_, _Blood-Spavin_, and _Bone-Spavin_. Windgalls and
Thorough Pins are but local variations of the same essential
condition—enlargements of the bursa and tendons of the joint. It
usually shows itself on the inner and lower side of the hock at the
lower portion of the joint. A careful comparison of the two legs with
the eye and hand will best disclose the evil. “Sometimes it appears as
a soft swelling of the femoral vein along the inner surface of the
hock. Or, again, as a hot, painful, lameing swelling, extending from
the posterior border of the hock downward, which may afterward become
a hard, bony tumor, insensible, causing the animal to limp only when
making some exertion. Or, the swelling extends along the inner surface
of the hock, oblong, a little broader above than below, bony,
sometimes involving the entire joint, and occasioning more or less
limping. Or a soft round swelling over the whole internal surface of
the hock, at first not impeding the horse’s gait, but afterward
becoming indurated and causing a rigidity of the hock and consequent
lameness. Or a hard osseous swelling at the upper and inner side of
the femur, causing a lameness depending upon the extent to which the
ligaments of the joints are involved.”

At first the animal seems afraid to use one or the other of the hind
legs, and a little lameness is noticed on first starting off. Afterward,
when returning to the stable after exertion, the horse stands on the toe
of the affected limb, and limps considerably on turning around and first
commencing to walk; after moving a little, the lameness disappears, and
only returns again after he has been standing some time. This will soon
be followed by swelling.

CAUSES.—There is a predisposition to this affection in some families of
horses, and when this predisposition exists, strains, violent exertion,
over-work, a blow or other injury, readily develops the spavin. Horses
with high legs, from three to seven years of age, are most liable to it.

TREATMENT.—In the earlier stages, while the lameness is yet recent, and
little or no swelling has appeared, bathing the joint with HUMPHREYS’
MARVEL WITCH HAZEL and giving B.B., night and morning, doses of fifteen
drops, will be sufficient to remove the lameness and generally prevent
the swelling. When the swelling is still soft and recent, bathing the
joint with THE MARVEL and giving the B.B., night and morning, will
reduce the swelling and relieve the lameness.

In all other cases of spavin, whatever may be its particular form or
situation, give fifteen drops of B.B., each morning and night, see that
the legs are well rubbed, with but moderate daily work or exercise. The
pain, lameness, and subsequent exudation of bony matter depend upon the
affection of the ligaments of the joint. This being relieved, the whole
affection disappears. All recent and soft spavins may be successfully
treated thus, and even the most inveterate ones will be relieved and
benefited. It is not pretended or presumed that old chronic, years’
standing spavins, when there are extensive ossific dispositions or
necrosis, are to be caused to disappear by this or any medicine. But all
those incipient cases may be thus cured and even the old enlargements
vastly improved.


                                 Splint

In consequence of an injury a bony tumor arises in the inside of the
fore-leg below the knee; sometimes, though rarely, it is seen on the
outside, and even on the hind legs. After having existed some time, they
seldom occasion lameness, except so situated as to interfere with the
action of the tendons or ligaments of the legs. During the forming
stage, the horse is lame because the periosteum or covering of the bone
is inflamed, but after this has subsided and the bony exudation is
thrown out, it disappears, except in the case above mentioned. In some
cases, in the beginning, the feet are hot and painful, the animal likes
to remain lying down; and if only the fore-feet are affected, he puts
them down with great care and evident pain, and there is general fever
and suffering, which passes off with the more decided local
manifestation. If the tumor is of some standing, it may be quite
difficult or impossible to cause its disappearance. But happily these
old hardened tumors seldom interfere with the essential usefulness of
the animal.

TREATMENT.—In most cases if there is heat and feverish excitement of the
system, give fifteen drops of A.A., and B.B., alternately, five times
per day, that is, a dose of B.B. morning, noon and night, and a dose of
A.A., at say ten o’clock in the forenoon and at three in the afternoon,
until the heat and lameness are partially subdued, and then give B.B.,
morning and night, until the lameness and irritation have entirely
subsided. Old cases may only require a dose every day.


                               Ring Bone

Consists of an enlargement and ossific deposit (near the fetlock joint)
in consequence of a strain and inflammatory action. It may appear on one
or both sides of the foot, or completely surround it, giving rise to the
name. One or more feet may be affected by it. It is generally recognized
by a mere bony enlargement on one or both sides of the pastern, and the
lameness is not very considerable.

TREATMENT.—At the commencement bathe the part with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL
WITCH HAZEL or VETERINARY OIL from day to day, and give fifteen drops of
B.B., three times a day. In chronic cases, give a dose morning and
night, or even only once per day. Cases of considerable standing will
materially improve, and recent or fresh cases may be permanently
restored.


                           Thrush and Canker

This disease is an inflammation of the lower surface of the sensible
frog, which secretes matter of a peculiar offensive smell, instead of
healthy horn. The matter issues from the cleft of the frog. In a sound
frog the cleft is shallow, but when contracted or otherwise diseased,
the cleft deepens even to the sensible horn within, and through this the
matter issues. Afterwards the discharge becomes more abundant and
offensive; the frog wears off and a fresh growth of horn fails to
appear. It then becomes thin, shriveled, contracted and fissured; and as
the disease extends, the matter becomes still more fetid, and may
terminate in a yet more unmanageable form of disease, namely, _canker_.
In Thrush, the frog is painful when pressed upon by the thumb or
pincers, or when the animal treads upon a stone. As a consequence of
neglected thrush, the horn may separate from the sensible part of the
foot, and unhealthy vegetations, proud flesh, fungous matter spring up,
occupying a portion or the whole of the sole of the frog, and finally
involving frog, sole and bars, in a mass of putrefaction, constituting
the worst form of _canker_.

TREATMENT.—As thrush is often caused by uncleanliness and constant
moisture of the feet, the greatest care must be taken to keep them dry
and clean, and especially from dung and urine. If connected with
contracted fore-feet, particular care must be given to shoeing.

The frog should be carefully pared down and all loose, ragged portions
removed in order to prevent the accumulation of matter and dirt. The
discharge wiped off by means of a tow pressed down into the cleft with a
thin piece of wood. Then smear the frog and cleft with a mixture
composed of half an ounce of _sulphate of copper_ (blue vitriol) and six
ounces of tar made into a paste or the VETERINARY OIL. A small piece of
tow dipped in this mixture should also be placed in the cleft, or in
whatever part of the frog a sinus, hole or cleft exists. In bad cases,
repeat the dressing daily; in others, once in two or three days is
sufficient. If the dressing is properly applied it will not fall out or
admit the entrance of dirt. Should the frog be extensively diseased, a
bar-shoe may be necessary, and the dressing will then be kept in place
by the cross bar of iron, or a leather sole may be used under the shoe.

Throughout the treatment give fifteen drops of I.I., each morning and
fifteen drops of J.K., every night, for the growth of healthy hoof.




                          CHAPTER IV.—PART I.
                          DISEASES OF THE EYES


           Albugo, or Spot in the Eye, Opacity of the Cornea

In consequence of a blow, stroke of a whip, or similar injury, an
inflammatory action is set up in the eye, the result of which is an
effusion of serum between the lamina of the outer coating of the eye,
which renders the cornea or clear part of the eye, whitish or opaque in
spots, interfering materially with the sight and usefulness of the
organ. But little can be done to remove those of long standing, but
recent cases, or those where inflammation is just subsiding and the
opacity only forming, will be dispelled by frequently bathing the eye
with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, and giving fifteen drops of A.A.,
three times per day. In many cases of opacity a portion of soft honey,
the size of a small pea, put in the eye daily, has been known to have a
wonderful effect in removing such opacities.


                        Amaurosis, Gutta Serena

This disease consists in entire or partial loss of vision in consequence
of paralysis of the optic nerve, or interruption of its communication
with the brain. Injuries of the head, or ball of the eye, or some
disease of the brain, are the usual causes. The horse walks cautiously,
head elevated, and ears move quickly backward and forward, the eye has a
peculiar glassy appearance, and the pupil does not dilate and contract
when light is brought near or removed from the eye.

But little can be done for these cases. In the earlier stages a dose of
A.A., may possibly arrest its progress, but generally it is incurable in
man or beast.


                                Cataract

In consequence of injuries to the eye, blows, contusions, etc., or as a
consequence of severe and repeated inflammation, the crystalline lens
becomes opaque so as to interfere with or altogether destroy the sight.
On examining the eye, deep in the pupil, a whitish, yellowish, or
brownish body is discoverable. Sometimes, especially in the
commencement, white streaks run from the center outward, or the whole
chamber within the pupil looks dim and whitish.

Old Cataracts are incurable, but recent and forming cases may be
benefited by giving A.A. and B.B., a dose of fifteen drops, every night,
alternately.


                  Ophthalmia, Inflammation of the Eye

There are in the horse two well marked forms of sore or inflamed eyes.
ACUTE OPHTHALMIA and PERIODIC or MOON BLINDNESS. Acute inflammation
occurs usually in consequence of some irritating substance, hay seed,
dust, etc., having got into the eye, or from overheating, heated foot,
or from hereditary predisposition.

SYMPTOMS.—It comes on with heat and uneasiness, the animal keeps the eye
closed, or dreads the light, the eye-ball and inside of the lid look
red, and the ball is protruded and the eye secretes a quantity of water,
which runs down on the cheek, or of humor, which becomes purulent, and
glues the lids together. The cornea is dim and whitish, or covered with
a scum, the haw is swollen and red.

TREATMENT.—Examine the eye for dirt, hay seed, hair, or other
substances, and if found, carefully remove them. They are more
frequently under the upper lid, which may be turned inside out over the
point of the finger, by taking the lashes between the finger and thumb,
and turning the lid upward. The eyes should be bathed with HUMPHREYS’
MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, diluted one-half with water, or if this be not at
hand, make a lotion by putting four or five drops of A.A., in a
half-pint of pure, soft water, and the eye should be bathed with this
two or three times per day, so long as the heat and swelling exist. Give
at the same time, in recent cases, fifteen drops of A.A., four times per
day, and in old cases the same dose morning and night. Arnica is of
little consequence, except where the inflammation is the result of a
bruise.

PERIODIC OPHTHALMIA is really a general affection, the result of
teething, and usually appears on the cutting of the middle incisors, the
molars, and tusks, and hence, at the age of from three to five years.

SYMPTOMS.—Generally only one eye is attacked; the eye looks smaller,
swims in tears, and is sensitive to the light, the cornea becomes dim
and leaden, and the lens look gray. The pulse is full and frequent; the
mouth hot, tongue dry, the water scanty and bowels constipated. There is
evidently feverish excitement of the system and congestion of the blood
to the head. Not unfrequently the inflammation passes from one eye to
the other. Severe or repeated attacks are very apt to return again or
leave as results, dimness of the cornea, opacity of the lens or cataract
behind them.

TREATMENT.—Exclude the animal from the glare of the light, and give at
once ten drops of A.A., every four or six hours. Bathe the eye from time
to time with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL diluted with an equal
quantity of soft water, or with the lotion mentioned in the case of
Acute Ophthalmia. Keep him on low diet and the case will generally be
soon relieved. As the eye improves, the intervals between the doses of
medicine should be prolonged. Often a dose night and morning is
sufficient. Given early it will prevent the development of serious
consequences.


                                The Haw

We mention in this connection a curious mechanism of the eye more to
guard against abuses than to cure disease. Concealed within the inner
corner of the eye, the margin only visible, is a black or pied
triangular-shapen cartilage called THE HAW, with its broad part forward.
It is concave, exactly to suit the globe of the eye, and convex without,
so as to adapt itself to the mucous lining of the lid, and the base of
it is reduced to a thin, sharp edge. At the will of the animal this is
rapidly protruded from its hiding place, and passing swiftly over the
eye, shovels up every nuisance mixed with tears, and then being suddenly
drawn back, the dust or insect is wiped away as the haw again passes
under the corner of the eye. The haw is subject in common with other
parts of the eye to inflammation and swelling and senseless grooms term
this “the HOOKS,” and have been known to draw the haw out and cut it
off, to the lasting injury of the organ.

Such an inflammation only requires the usual treatment, and will be
subdued by bathing the eye with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, diluted
one-half water, and giving A.A. internally, ten drops as a dose and
repeated morning and night.


                          Injuries to the Eye

Must be treated both internally and externally.

REMEDIES.—HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL and A.A.

The MARVEL, if the injury has been produced by a mechanical cause, as
blows from a whip, punctures, etc., and there is much soreness and
inflammation, it should be applied externally, in the form of a lotion
of one part of MARVEL to three parts of water, and the injured part
bathed three times a day, at the same time A.A. should be given
internally.

The A.A. should be given, if there is much inflammation, or the eye is
congested.

H.H. may be used later, if there is any dimness of the eye left.

Sometimes pieces of hay or chaff get into the eye and cause a great deal
of irritation; of course the first thing to be done is to carefully
remove them, and then apply the MARVEL, diluted with half water, which,
in the majority of cases, is all that is necessary to be done.




                           CHAPTER V.—PART I.
                   DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM


                   Structure and Action of the Heart

Before entering on a description of the diseases of the Heart, it may be
well to give a brief description of that organ and its functions, for
the benefit of non-professional readers.

The heart is placed in the center of the thorax, in the space between
the lungs, and opposite the third, fourth, fifth and sixth ribs. It may
be described as a muscular forcing pump, for the transmission of blood
to all parts of the body. The texture of the heart is muscular, with
tendinous or cartilaginous bands around the openings between the
auricles and ventricles, and between the latter and the arteries. It
contains four chambers, viz.: two auricles and two ventricles; each
auricle communicates with its corresponding ventricle; but the auricles
do not communicate with each other, nor do the ventricles. The opening
in each pair is guarded by a little valve, in order to ensure the flow
of blood in one direction, and to prevent any regurgitation or re-flow
from the ventricles into the auricles. We find valves for a similar
purpose placed at the origin of the pulmonary artery and the aorta,
which proceed from the right and left ventricles, and are the channels
by which the blood flows through the former to the lungs, through the
latter to the general circulation. The chambers of the heart are lined
by a smooth membrane of a serous character, called the endocardium,
which is often the seat of disease; and the whole is enclosed in a
fibro-serous sac, called the pericardium.

On examining the heart, it will be found externally divided by a furrow,
which corresponds with a muscular septum, dividing the organ into two
parts, or two hearts, having no direct communication with one another,
except in the fetus. The right side, whose parts are thinner than the
left, may be called the venous heart, as it receives the blood in an
impure state from the veins, and transmits it through the pulmonary
arteries to the lungs, where it becomes exposed to the atmosphere, and
converted from venous into arterial blood. It is then conveyed by the
pulmonary arteries to the left auricle and ventricle, whence it is
propelled through the aorta and its branches to all parts of the body.

The dimension and weight of a healthy heart vary so much that it is not
possible to give them accurately, but the average is stated as follows
by Mr. Walsh: “It is about ten and a quarter inches from the base to the
apex, seven inches in its antero-posterior diameter, and five and a
quarter from side to side. In weight, it varies from six and a half to
seven pounds. The auricles have much thinner walls than the ventricles,
and the muscular substance or the left ventricle, occupying the apex of
the heart, is very much thicker than that of the right.”

The nerves which supply the heart are the pneumogastric and sympathetic.

Idiopathic disease of the heart in the equine race is a very rare
occurrence; but, as a consequence or accompaniment of influenza and
fevers of a low type, is by no means uncommon; it is therefore of
importance that we should know how to diagnose both the organic and
functional derangement of so important an organ, which can only be done
by making ourselves familiar with.

THE ACTION OF THE HEART IN HEALTH.—There are three means by which this
knowledge may be attained: first, by _Percussion_, which, in the human
subject, affords an index to the size and position of the heart; but in
consequence of the less exposed position of that organ in the horse, is
of little value, except in diagnosing Hydrops Pericardii. Second, by
_Impulse_, or the force of the beat imparted to the hand placed flat on
the near side of the chest, just behind the elbow. Third, by
_Auscultation_, which is the only reliable way of ascertaining the
condition of the heart, and consists in placing one ear, or a
stethoscope, in the same position as that already described. Two
distinct sounds can be heard; the first, termed the “systolic,” is
louder and more prolonged than the second (which immediately follows),
and seems to depend upon the contraction of the ventricle; during this
contraction the organ elongates and rotates on its axis from right to
left, thus producing the impulse and sound on the left side of the
thorax. The second, “diastolic,” or “flapping,” sound, cannot be heard
in a fat, circular-chested horse; it is supposed to arise from the
regurgitation of the blood, which is in the aorta and pulmonary
arteries, forcibly closing the valves placed at their origin in the
ventricles, so as to prevent the blood coming back into the heart. These
sounds together form what is called the “beat,” and are succeeded by a
brief interval of repose. In the healthy animal these beats are uniform
and regular, corresponding with the pulse; but in disease there may be,
first, increase or diminution in the frequency and strength of the
beats; second, irregular or intermittent action of the heart. In the
latter case, we hear two or three beats in quick succession, and then a
longer interval of repose than is natural, followed by the consecutive,
quick beats and long repose, the number of the former and duration of
the latter being singularly uniform. Third, the systolic and diastolic
sounds may increase, diminish, or be succeeded by other sounds
indicative of disease hereafter described.


                    Pericarditis—Dropsy of the Heart

DEFINITION.—Inflammation of the fibro-serous membrane which invests the
heart, causing the effusion of a serous fluid. It occurs as a primary
affection and as a complication in Influenza, Rheumatism and other
constitutional diseases.

CAUSES.—When met with in an idiopathic form, which is very rare, it may
depend upon exposure to damp, cold, changes of temperature, and those
unhealthy conditions which also cause acute diseases of the respiratory
organs. It may also arise from a sudden change from low, to rich heating
food, or from the field to a hot stable. But it usually occurs as an
accompaniment of Pleurisy or Rheumatism.

SYMPTOMS.—The horse stands quiet, showing signs of pain and anguish,
with sunken head, anxious expression in the face, dilated nostrils,
frequent (100 to 120), wiry, and sometimes IRREGULAR or intermittent
PULSE, and general intense fever.

The breathing is also accelerated (36) and difficult, and is accompanied
by a movement of the flank similar to that seen in broken wind, and by a
deep depression along the margin of the costal cartilages. In the early
stages, pressure on the left side, and smart percussion in the region of
the heart, cause flinching and expression of pain; and auscultation,
_before exudation has taken place_, reveals friction—_to and
fro_—sounds. These sounds are, however, not uniformly present in this
disorder, nor is their presence an unquestionable proof of its
existence, for similar sounds may be do to pleural disease, the latter
being characterized by synchronism with the respiratory movements. The
friction sounds are therefore of little value, except as concurrent with
other symptoms. They also cease when exudation or adhesion has taken
place; then the heart’s beats are muffled. In the later stages, the
heart, which at first palpitates, soon becomes fluttering and uncertain
in its beat, conveying a peculiar pulsation to the hand, not easily to
be described. No impulse can be felt when the effusion is considerable.
Percussion gives a dull sound over the region of the heart, but not so
in other parts of the chest, where the respiratory and bronchial sounds
may be heard, thus distinguishing Hydrops Percardii from Hydrothorax.
The breathing gradually becomes more distressing, and movement
aggravates the distress; the pulse more feeble and even imperceptible at
the jaw; the ears and legs cold; the legs, sheath, chest, abdomen, etc.,
œdematous; and the general wasting rapid till death ensues.

DIAGNOSIS.—The friction sounds, and pain on percussion in the region of
the heart, with irregularity in its beats, and a peculiarly anxious
expression of countenance, are the principal pathognomic symptoms—to
which Delafond adds dyspnœa, attended by an action of the flank like
that of a broken winded horse. The great difficulty is to distinguish
this disease from Pleurisy, which may be done by accurately marking the
period at which the frictional sounds occur, viz.: during the systole or
beat of the heart, whereas for Pleuritis we hear it during the
respiratory movements of the lungs. When the pericardial fluid becomes
much increased, the friction sound ceases, as does also the impulse of
the heart, which at first usually palpitates, then becomes fluttering,
feeble, and intermittent, and at last can with difficulty be heard.
Percussion gives a dull sound in the region of the heart, but just
behind it, as well as in other parts of the lungs; if there is no
disease in them, or Hydrothorax, the resonance in those parts will serve
to distinguish Hydrops Pericardii from Hydrothorax.

PROGNOSIS.—In the strong, and in the majority of cases, favorable.

TREATMENT.—A.A., given every three hours, and later, four times per day,
will be proper.


                              Endocarditis

DEFINITION.—Inflammation of the fibro-serous membrane which lines the
heart.

This is a very common complication in Rheumatism, and is very acute and
dangerous; the danger arising less from the fatality of the acute stage,
than from the lesions which are consequent upon it.

SYMPTOMS.—In Endocarditis the contractions of the heart are energetic,
vibratory, and often irregular; the pulse is also irregular, and
frequently intermittent, and there is a contrast between the feebleness
of the pulse and the violence of the heart beats. Leblanc states that
this last symptom is characteristic of Endocarditis. He has also
observed a loud metallic tinkling, and a _bruit de souffle_, or sound
like the blowing of a pair of bellows, or a sawing noise, like bronchial
respiration, accompanying the systole of the heart. In the early stages,
the breathing is not so difficult as in Pericarditis; but if the
auriculo-ventricular valves are thickened, it becomes distressing.
Sometimes the whole of the membrane is thickened; in other cases the
lesion is limited; in others, the abnormal growth forms a cardiac
Polypus, which may grow to an enormous size. The legs are usually cold.

PATHOLOGY.—The endocardium, although a serous membrane, is mixed with
fibrous elastic tissue at its valvular reduplications, which accounts
for the disease being so frequently associated with rheumatism, and for
the morbid appearances more commonly witnessed in the valvular structure
of the heart than elsewhere. The natural result of inflammation in this,
as in other serous membranes, is the effusion of lymph, and consequent
thickening, which sometimes interferes with the play of the valves, or
narrows the auriculo-ventricular openings, thus producing the
bellows-sound which has been described as one of the chief symptoms. The
inflammation may extend to the muscular substance of the heart, which
becomes darkened in color and easily broken down; while in some cases
large quantities of fibrin are thrown out, which quite block up the
auriculo-ventricular openings and orifices of the large blood-vessels.
To Endocarditis may also be traced Tumors and Polypi, as well as
Hypertrophy and Dilatation. Abscess in the walls of the heart has also
been observed as a consequence of Endocarditis.

DIAGNOSIS.—The pathognomic symptoms of Endocarditis are frequently very
obscure, being like those of Pericarditis; but it is of very little
consequence, as the treatment must be similar. However, the
bellows-sound in the former, and the friction sound in the latter, are
sufficient in the majority of cases to point out the nature of the
disease when taken in connection with other symptoms which have been
mentioned.

PROGNOSIS.—Owing to the various terminations of Endocarditis, nearly all
of a serious character, our opinion as to the ultimate result must be
unfavorable, although in the majority of cases the animal appears to
recover; but he is found afterwards not as good in his wind as formerly,
easily distressed, and when going at an ordinary pace with hounds, will
probably fall down and expire suddenly. A.A. will be our best resource.


                  Hypertrophy—Enlargement of the Heart

DEFINITION.—An abnormal growth of the muscular tissue of the heart by
thickening of the walls.

VARIETIES.—There are three. Simple Hypertrophy is the thickening of the
walls without any change in the capacity of the cavities. Eccentric
Hypertrophy is the thickening of the walls with dilatation of the
cavities. Concentric Hypertrophy is the thickening of the walls with
diminution of the cavities. The lesion is usually associated with other
diseases, and especially with affections of the lungs.

The disorder is slow in its progress, though it soon interferes with the
working capacity of the animal. It predisposes to other lesions, such as
congestion of the lungs, hemorrhage, etc.

CAUSES.—Excessive effort of the heart to overcome obstruction to its
action; constriction of the vessels and of the openings between the
different cavities of the heart; deposits on the semi lunar valves;
Aneurism of the aorta or the pulmonary artery; excessive physical
exertion and consequent exhaustion of the heart. Mr. Pritchard remarks
that “horses, particularly those employed in quick draught, are commonly
called on to perform arduous tasks with full stomachs, by which the free
action of the lungs is considerably impeded; thus, obstruction being
given to the circulation through the pulmonary vessels, corresponding
increase of force in the action of the heart is the consequence.”
Hypertrophy has been often observed in broken winded horses.

SYMPTOMS.—Strong, impulsive movement of the heart, which remains
constant; intensity of sound, with a loud, hollow thumping beat; a
metallic _bruit_ or “clack”; irregularity of rhythm; dullness on
percussion. The horse is easily distressed, palpitation comes on with
ordinary quick work, and there is an anxious expression in his eye on
these occasions, which leads us to suspect that there is something amiss
with the animal. These symptoms are attended with languor, coldness of
legs and ears, dyspnœa, giddiness or Megrims, loss of appetite, and, in
a later stage of the disease, with œdematous swelling of the chest,
abdomen, and extremities.

PATHOLOGY.—The thickening of the walls of the heart may be regarded as a
beautiful provision of nature to strengthen the organ and enable it to
overcome the obstacle which exists to the free circulation of blood
through it. The thickening of the muscle depends upon excess of
nutrition consequent on increased action; similar to the change in the
biceps muscle of the blacksmith’s arm from hard work.

It may be an idiopathic disease not dependent on obstruction; but such
cases are very rare. The obstruction will usually be found to depend on
disease of some of the valves, or constriction of the aorta or pulmonary
artery at its origin. The Hypertrophy may be general, or we may find
only one auricle or ventricle (generally the latter) whose walls are
thickened.

DIAGNOSIS.—The increased impulse of the heart, especially after quick
work; the irregularity of the pulse and thick wind, without any lung
disease being present; and the dullness on percussion over the cardiac
region, are the chief pathognomic symptoms.

PROGNOSIS.—Although the disease is incurable, a horse may live for years
with enlarged heart.

TREATMENT.—Doses of A.A. will be of value in conjunction with only
moderate work and good care.


                          Atrophy of the Heart

DEFINITION.—Emaciation or wasting away of the walls of the heart.

CAUSES.—Similar to those of dilatation. Loss of nervous power through
the degenerating influence of fevers induces Atrophy by weakening the
muscular fibres of the heart.

SYMPTOMS.—Feeble impulse of the heart, with louder sounds than are
usually heard on applying the ear to the chest. The pulse is generally
slow, feeble and intermittent. The veins in the neck may also be
observed to pulsate. The animal is dull and fastidious in his appetite;
dropsical swellings appear on the chest and belly; the legs become cold
or œdematous. There is difficulty in breathing on the slightest
exertion, and sometimes palpitation or fluttering of the heart.

PATHOLOGY.—There are two forms of Atrophy, one in which there is a
wasted and flabby appearance of the organ, whose parietes are so weak
that when removed from the body it does not retain the rounded symmetry
of a natural heart, but becomes a shapeless mass when thrown on the
ground. This form of Atrophy was frequently met with during the
prevalence of the Cattle Plague, and it has been observed in connection
with some forms of Influenza. The second form of Atrophy is termed Fatty
Degeneration of the heart. Of this there are two varieties. In one the
fat grows on the surface of the organ, encroaching on and insinuating
itself between the muscular fibres, impoverishing them, and ultimately
causing them to waste; the result is that the muscular walls become
thin. In the other variety, fat in a molecular form takes the place of
the muscular element, and ultimately fills the sheaths, which previously
contained muscular fibre.


                        Dilatation of the Heart

DEFINITION.—Enlargement of one or more of the cavities of the heart.

CAUSES.—Some defect in the valvular apparatus, allowing the blood to
regurgitate and to distend the cavity, which, by pressure on the walls,
causes absorption and attenuation; loss of power in the nervous system;
fevers of a sthenic or typhoid character, which weaken the muscular
fibres.

SYMPTOMS.—The action of the heart is feeble and tremulous; the pulse
small, soft and weak; the least exertion brings on Dyspnœa; there are
languor, giddiness, or “Megrims”; the horse is “off his food”; the ears
and legs are cold; and ultimately there is œdema of the legs, belly and
chest.

PATHOLOGY.—Dilatation may exist either with Hypertrophy or with Atrophy
of the walls of the heart, and in the latter case is most probably an
effect of the emaciated state of the muscular substance of the heart,
which allows the blood to accumulate, and to distend one or more of the
auricles or ventricles.

TREATMENT.—Dilatation and atrophy of the heart admit of very little help
in the majority of cases, moderate work and occasional or daily use of
A.A., will be proper, and do something towards improving the condition
and prolonging the usefulness of the animal.


                              Palpitation

DEFINITION.—An abnormal increase in the action of the heart.

Irregularity in the action of the heart is a functional derangement, and
not do to organic disease. It occurs in horses that are in feeble health
and out of condition, or that have been subject to severe and straining
exercise, such as pulling a heavy load uphill or running hard with the
hounds.


                           Anemic Palpitation

CAUSE.—Poverty of blood.

SYMPTOMS.—A dull, thumping sound is heard to proceed from the cavity of
the chest, which, in extreme cases, may be heard on both sides, and may
even be audible at a distance of some yards, corresponding to the
beatings of the heart and pulse; tumultuous breathing, redness of the
mucous membranes, increased temperature of the body. Auscultation will
detect blood sounds in the neighborhood of the heart, large arteries,
and veins. These “anemic murmurs” vary with the condition of the blood,
and are caused by its “churning” as it passes through the traversing
channels of the heart. They constitute a continuous hum, or the “_bruit
de diable_” of the French. In some cases the action of the heart is so
great that it causes shaking or jerking of the whole body.

PROGNOSIS.—When the palpitation does not proceed from any organic
disease, we may expect to remove it in a very short time by appropriate
homeopathic remedies. A dose of A.A. often relieves an attack.

  DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SO CALLED SPASM OF THE DIAPHRAGM (PALPITATION)
              AND TRUE SPASM OF THE DIAPHRAGM (HICCOUGH).
 ──────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────
 SO CALLED SPASM  OF THE DIAPHRAGM.│   TRUE SPASM OF THE DIAPHRAGM.
 ──────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────
 Hiccough is seldom present.       │Hiccough is always present.
 The action of the abdominal       │The action of the abdominal
 muscles is increased and the      │muscles at the flank is
 heaving of the flanks is quite    │imperceptible.
 visible. In those cases, where    │
 Palpitation occurs from a hard run│
 with the hounds, the diaphragm    │
 becomes tired, the abdominal      │
 muscles come to its assistance in │
 carrying on the respiration and   │
 the heart’s action is increased in│
 order to overcome the obstacle    │
 which probably exists in the      │
 pulmonary arteries.               │
 The flanks are tucked up.         │There is great fullness in the
                                   │flanks from the abdominal viscera
                                   │being pushed backwards.


                         Spasm of the Diaphragm

There is a form of palpitation which has received this designation, and
has been mistaken for a functional disorder of the diaphragm, or
excessive motion of the abdominal muscles. True Spasm of the Diaphragm
is Hiccough; and in this condition there are no such sounds as
characterize Palpitation.

CAUSE.—The excessive action of the heart, when the horse has been
distressed by severe gallops or an exciting run, produces a jerking of
the whole body, as the heart strikes the dorso-costal region, towards
the upper part of the first false ribs.

SYMPTOMS.—These are much the same as in Anemic Palpitation; but in
addition there is violent elevation of the flanks, perceptible to the
observer, and, if being ridden, most unpleasant to the rider. The
symptoms appear and disappear suddenly.

TREATMENT.—Give A.A. once in two hours, at first, and later three times
per day.


                                Embolism

DEFINITION.—Distension and plugging of the arteries by solid coagulated
lymph, consisting of fibrous clots, fragments of decaying or suppurating
tissue, and the elements of Tubercule and Cancer.

CAUSE.—The reason why there is deposition of the offending material is
unexplained; but it is brought from different parts of the circulatory
system, from diseased tissues through the veins and the heart, and
deposited so as to obstruct larger or smaller arteries, and thus prevent
the flow of arterial blood to the limbs and organs. The arteries and
hind limbs are most liable to this disorder.

SYMPTOMS.—An accurate diagnosis is not always practicable, because the
disease itself is obscure. The symptoms which have been observed
attending Embolism are great pain, profuse sweat, but cold extremities;
quick, wiry pulse; and considerable general disturbance of health;
anxious expression of face; looking round to the affected parts;
rigidity and contraction of certain muscles; partial recovery and
simultaneous attack of the other limb, and return of attack to the
first; diminished pulse in the arteries of the implicated limb; peculiar
throbbing of the posterior aorta felt through the rectum; followed by
partial or complete paralysis of the limb or hind quarters; and
ultimately death.


                                Aneurism

DEFINITION.—A tumor formed by the dilatation of an artery, or
communicating with an artery, and containing blood. In the first stage
the tumor contains fluid blood, and pulsates; in its second stage it
contains coagulated blood, deposited in numerous thin layers, resembling
the leaves of a book.

Aneurism may be idiopathic or traumatic; the latter is caused by injury
to the artery. In the idiopathic or spontaneous Aneurism the dilatation
may be of considerable extent, or it may be limited, with the coats of
the artery intact or even thickened, or the inner coat may be attenuated
and the outer one pressed outward. As the Aneurism becomes old, the
coats become indurated, calcified and liable to burst. It is not an
uncommon disorder in the horse, and when it occurs it is generally in
the deep-seated arteries. The posterior aorta, at the origin of the
anterior mesenteric artery, is very subject to Aneurism as animals grow
older.

DIAGNOSIS.—This is extremely difficult, for the attendant symptoms may
be readily attributed to some other malady. They often come on suddenly;
the horse becomes dejected, thin, and unable to work; respiration is
accelerated; pulse and heart beats are irregular; there is some
stiffness in turning, or tenderness on pressure applied to the loins;
swelling and cramps in the hind legs; Paralysis.


                             Varicose Veins

DEFINITION.—A morbid dilatation of the veins, causing a knotty, unequal
swelling, so that their valves, which cannot undergo a corresponding
enlargement, cease to be efficient. The effect is a retarded and
imperfect flow of blood on the return to the heart.

The disease occurs most frequently in the form of a soft, elastic tumor
in the saphena vein, where it passes over the inner surface of the hock
joint; but it may affect another vein, or many veins. It is commonly
found where the blood has been repeatedly drawn.

CAUSES.—Violent efforts in drawing; strains; inflammation set up by a
prick in shoeing; frequent bloodlettings.

SYMPTOMS.—The affected veins are dilated, tortuous, knotted, and divided
into separate pouches, with obliteration of the valves. Varix of the
saphena at the hock joint is attended with a tumor, which gradually
increases in size, is flaccid to the touch, slightly pendulous, and
shaking loosely when the horse walks; becoming full and tense on
pressure of the vein above it; and capable of evacuation by pressure
from below upward.

TREATMENT.—Occasional doses of A.A., are beneficial.




                          CHAPTER VI.—PART I.
                     DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM


                                Apoplexy

Occasionally, in consequence of high feeding and deficient exercise, and
especially in fat young horses, with short necks and large
blood-vessels, this disease occurs. It may also come on in consequence
of drawing a heavy load up a hill. It is predisposed by an overloaded
stomach.

SYMPTOMS.—In apoplexy, the horse either suddenly falls down lifeless, or
there are premonitory symptoms, such as vertigo, the animal holds his
head down, or leans it upon something, yawns, perspires slightly, and
moves clumsily, etc. Afterwards, the animal falls down suddenly, the
circulation becomes disturbed and irregular, eyes red, protruded, and
staring; breathing labored, short, rattling; body covered with sweat,
and eyelids paralyzed. After a few convulsions the animal dies; or, in
rare cases, an improvement takes place, to be again, after a longer or
shorter period of time, followed by relapse, or to result in paralysis.
(Compare the symptoms with those of Epilepsy).

TREATMENT.—So soon as any of the premonitory symptoms are observed, give
fifteen drops of A.A. at once, and repeat the dose every one, two or
three hours, until the animal is relieved, and then at longer intervals.
If the horse falls under an attack of the disease, give of the above
Remedy at once, and repeat the dose every half hour or hour; remove the
harness, etc., and from time to time pour some cold water upon the head,
not too much or too violently, while you also give the medicine
internally. Injections of salt and water also may be of decided
advantage.


                                Epilepsy

This disease sometimes appears in the horse, and manifests itself in the
following manner: the animal suddenly trembles, remains standing for an
instant with legs spread out, staggers, and then falls; convulsions
ensue; he kicks, rolls, and twists himself about, grinds his teeth,
passes his dung and urine involuntarily, froths at the mouth, the
motions of the eye are spasmodic, irregular, and the respiration loud,
painful and sobbing. After a while he becomes quiet, breathing regular,
and he gradually comes to himself as if coming out of a dream. The
duration of a fit varies from a few minutes to a half hour. The attacks
return again at periods varying from a few days to several weeks or
months, generally coming at shorter intervals. Epilepsy differs from
apoplexy as spasm differs from paralysis, and a little attention will
not fail to distinguish them.

The causes are deep-seated changes in the nervous organism, and they are
rarely curable.

TREATMENT.—Give, on any premonitions of an attack, fifteen drops of A.A.
at once, and you will usually ward it off. For an attack, put a few
drops in the mouth as soon as you can safely do it, and repeat it every
half hour or hour, until the paroxysm is ended. Afterwards, always give
one dose to prevent a return.


                    Vertigo, Megrims, Blind Staggers

This is rather a frequent affection of the horse, and is a consequence
of an undue pressure or rush of blood to the head, in most cases also
excited by indigestion or over-fullness of the stomach.

In the milder cases, the horse stops suddenly, shakes his head or even
staggers in evident giddiness and half-unconsciousness for a moment, and
then goes on again as if nothing had happened. In more severe cases, he
stops suddenly, shakes his head, falls or drops down, or after a few
unconscious turns and a violent struggle, will become insensible, and
then rise up and go on again; such attacks closely simulate true
epilepsy.

TREATMENT.—In all similar cases, whether incipient or fully developed,
give fifteen drops of A.A., and repeat it every quarter or half hour,
until the animal is relieved, or for twelve or twenty-four hours, and
then at intervals of say four hours, alternate it with J.K., until
restored. When this dozing, stupid condition mentioned above is present,
indicating evident congestion to the head, fifteen drops of A.A., each
morning and noon, and the same of J.K., at night, will soon restore the
animal again.


                               Paralysis

Paralysis, entire or partial loss of nervous power over the muscles of
certain parts or portions of the body, occasionally occurs in the horse
as a consequence of mechanical injuries, severe cold, or some internal
cause.

When occurring in the face, the muscles of one side lose the power of
motion; the lips hang down, and seem swollen, are drawn to one side, or
pulled upward; food is picked up and retained with difficulty,
mastication is imperfect, and food drops readily from the mouth.
Sometimes there is no feeling in the face or lips.

When the hinder part of the body is paralized, the horse is unable to
rise or stand, sits on his haunches like a dog, constipation and arrest
of urination are apt to be present. In slighter cases, the hind legs
sway about clumsily or he drags them after him, or even walks on his
fetlocks.

TREATMENT.—The first course in case of recent paralysis, is to give
fifteen drops of A.A., every two hours, which continue one day; then
give fifteen drops of J.K., every four or six hours, according to the
circumstances, until relieved, and then morning and night for a time.


          Inflammation of the Brain, Phrenitis. Mad Staggers.

This disease is most frequently met with in entire horses, and attacks
especially those that are ardent, in high condition, but little worked;
and it is liable to be excited by a chill after being over-heated or
over-worked in hot weather. It may also arise from blows or similar
injuries on the head.

SYMPTOMS.—In some cases it comes on slowly; the horse is dull and
sleepy; rests his head on the manger, or places it against the wall or
between his legs, and falls asleep. In this state he will, perhaps,
stagger and almost fall to the ground; he, however, wakes up, stares
about him, takes a mouthful of hay, chews it slowly, and ere long is
again dozing or fast asleep. The eyelids are nearly closed; the eyes and
nose red; the pupils dilated; the bowels bound, and pulse slower than in
health. This is the congestive stage, and may continue until the animal
recovers or dies; but, in general, other symptoms appear to which the
name Mad Staggers may be more appropriately applied. In such cases the
pulse rises; the breathing is quickened; the nose and eyes are very red;
nostrils widened; the eyes have a wild, fierce look; the feet are
stamped, as if in passion; he plunges about the stall, rears upward,
strikes out with his fore-feet, and falls backward upon the ground,
where he lies panting and covered with sweat; his eyes are thrust
forward out of their sockets, and rattles are heard in the throat.
Towards the end these violent paroxysms are repeated from time to time,
and it is very dangerous to approach or go near him. At last, he is so
weak and prostrate that he cannot rise, and amidst convulsions,
strangling, foaming at the mouth, sweating, and panting for breath, the
animal dies.

TREATMENT.—The treatment will not be difficult, or the result doubtful,
during the congestive stage; but in the fully developed or phrentic
stage, quite so in both respects. The A.A., is the principal dependence,
and a dose of fifteen drops may be given every two or three hours, at
first, and as the horse improves, the intervals may be somewhat
prolonged. Continue this treatment steadily and without deviation.
During the paroxysms, the medicine may be given by means of a small
glass syringe, or the Medicator used in a similar manner. After the more
intense symptoms have passed over, some doses of J.K., alternately with
that of A. A., will be of value, giving one in the morning and the other
at night.

_Concussion of the brain_, inducing symptoms and a condition not
essentially varying from the above, requires the same treatment,
together with such external applications as the wound may require.


                          Tetanus, or Lock-Jaw

This disease is more common in the horse than in other domestic animals.
It consists of a muscular spasm of the jaw (whence its name), which
usually from thence extends to all the muscles of the body. It always
occurs in consequence of an injury or wound, such as broken knees, open
joints, severe bruises, nicked or docked tail, castration, wounds of the
feet, prick of a nail, or even the galling of a crupper, through which
opening the tetanus germ enters the body.

The germ of tetanus flourishes without air (anaerobic) and, outside of
the body, lives in soil and manure.

SYMPTOMS.—In general it comes on very slowly, but also, in some cases,
with great violence. The muscles of the neck and jaw are first affected,
so that the horse has great difficulty in swallowing and turning his
neck. The muscles then become quite stiff; the mouth is nearly closed;
the jaws cannot be parted, and little or no food can be taken into the
mouth. By degrees all the muscles become affected I with the same
stiffness and cramp; the eyes are still and staring, pulled back into
their sockets, and squinted outward, and the haw is thrust forward; the
neck can not be bent and the muscles feel hard and firm, the head can
not be raised or lowered, and is held forward, with the nose stretched
out; the nostrils are expanded; the ears pointed forward, erect, and
fixed; the lips are firmly stretched across the teeth, which are partly
seen; the saliva flows from the mouth; and the horse looks anxious, and
can scarcely move, the belly is hard and tucked up; the tail is lifted
up and held straight out, anti in constant tremble; the legs are firmly
fixed to the ground, and spread out from each other; the bowels are
bound, and urine passed with difficulty; the breathing is quickened,
labored and convulsive; the pulse is disturbed easily by frightening or
speaking angrily to the horse, and it becomes afterward weak and
trembling. While the spasm of the muscles continue, the animal is in
constant pain, although it is less severe at some times than others.

TREATMENT.—Where a wound or injury has taken place, and tetanus
supervenes, it will be, of course, traced directly to this, and the
wound should at once be treated as recommended for that particular case.
If the discharge has suddenly stopped, it should be reproduced by mild,
warm applications to the part.

To relieve the local injury before mentioned, the bran poultice is
usually best, and should be applied quite warm, and repeated every two
or four hours, or when it gets dry or cold. Look carefully and see if a
nail has been driven into the quick of the foot or some such injury
done, and always relieve the local injury as far as possible. The horse
should be treated with the greatest possible kindness and not be handled
roughly or unkindly. The groom must not shout or speak angrily, and too
much light must not be admitted to the stable for the same reason.
Everything must be done in the most kind and quiet manner possible, as
you have here not only a muscular spasm, but a congested condition of
the brain also. Before giving the medicine, the lips, mouth and tongue,
should be cleaned with a cool, wet cloth or rag, and the saliva or mucus
cleared away. If the tongue or lips are dry, moisten them freely with
cold water before giving the medicine. Bathe the head and neck freely
and the stiffened muscles along the sides of the neck, from time to
time, with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, and it will be well to inject
into the anus a quart of linseed or olive oil to quicken the movements
of the bowels.

At the first indication of any _stiffness_ of the _jaws_, or
_contraction_ of the _eye-brows_ or any _other muscle_, which are
usually the earlier symptoms of Lock-jaw, give fifteen drops of A.A.,
and repeat the dose every hour.

If the disease has been occasioned by a _prick of the foot_ or any
injury of any _tendon_ or like structure, give B.B., in alternation with
A.A. In like manner the H.H. may be indicated and given in alternation
with the A.A., where the kidneys have been implicated in the cause and
there is _scanty_, _suppressed_, or _difficult Staling_ as the result.

FOOD.—When the jaws are firmly set, no food can be given, but there are
times when the spasms relax, and the jaws are rather wider apart than at
other periods. Green food and gruel may then be offered to the horse.
When the jaws become more open, he may have bran-tea, clover-tea, or hay
tea, gruel and such similar food. If the jaws cannot be opened, or he
cannot swallow, meal or oatmeal gruel may be injected, by means of a
large syringe, into the fundament, and life be thus prolonged and a
chance thus given for the REMEDY to act.

Care must be taken to feed sparingly when recovering, or indigestion and
a fatal relapse may be the consequence.


                           Spinal Meningitis

This disease has become quite common in late years, sometimes appearing
in isolated cases, but more frequently prevailing in certain cities or
sections of country; and to such an extent as to warrant the idea of an
epizootic influence. Often a large number of horses in a City, County or
State, are more or less seriously attacked. It is mostly observed in the
Winter and Spring, and is favored by changeable weather, damp or too
close stables. Epizootics of this disease have also been observed in
low-lying sandy regions, doubtless favored if not caused by hauling
heavy loads over deep sandy roads and being exposed when heated and sore
from such effort to cold drenching rains. The disease having once been
developed from such conditions readily extends itself without the
originating conditions being present. It is also more common among
mares, from their being over-worked or strained when in heat.

THE EARLIER SYMPTOMS ARE: Dullness, indisposition to move, head hanging
low, and evident pain and stiffness on moving, and especially on being
turned around. It loses intelligence and takes no notice of things going
on around him. There is more or less tenderness and shrinking on
pressure on some portion of the spine or along the entire spine, from
the hips forward, or on each side over the kidneys. The animal does not
stand or move firmly, but sways from side to side or staggers in
walking, or seems to drag the hind legs after him, or is easily pushed
one side, or even over, or leans against the stall when standing.
Finally the back gives out, and the horse falls down, or cannot rise; he
has no strength in the hind legs. The pulse at first is not much, or but
slightly increased in frequency or force, but by degrees becomes more
rapid. The urine is often scanty or suppressed, the dung dry, and the
animal has from the first a distressed, suffering look.

When the disease has attained its height, the pulse becomes quick and
the temperature raised, and there is swelling of the throat and
congestion of the lungs, and in some cases high delirium. Later there is
increasing stiffness, paralysis and death.

The disease is frequently fatal in the more severe cases, in two or
three days, but often continues from seven to ten days, and recoveries
are usually quite slow.

TREATMENT.—A.A. should be given in doses of fifteen drops at first,
every hour; then, after six or eight hours—the intervals may be every
two hours, and as the animal improves, the intervals between doses may
be prolonged to three hours.

If during the disease, THE URINE, or staling should become _very
scanty_, or be passed _with difficulty_, or _with straining_, or BE
SUPPRESSED, then the H.H., for urinary or kidney affections, should be
given, a dose of fifteen drops, in alternation with the A.A. That is,
give the A.A., and after two hours, give the H.H., then after two hours
again give the A.A., and so on until the secretion of water is fully
established, when the H.H. may be discontinued.

AFTER THE MORE URGENT STAGE OF THE DISEASE HAS PASSED OVER, the heat and
fever mostly gone, and there yet remains SOME WEAKNESS OR PARTIAL
PARALYSIS OF THE LOINS, indicated by swaying, tottering or shambling
gait, the J.K. should be given at intervals of six hours. It is the
special remedy for partial or complete paralysis, or for the weakness
and debility after sickness.

The horse should have a loose box, or wide, roomy stall, well littered
and reasonably warm, and in cool or cold weather, be well covered with
blankets, and his legs should be occasionally well hand rubbed. Let him
have bran mashes, or carrot tea, and pick at some good hay. The animal
should not be exercised or worked too soon after recovery.




                          CHAPTER VII.—PART I.
                   DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY ORGANS


                                 Chill

This term is used to designate a transitory state or condition, which
may either terminate in recovery, or in severe inflammatory disease of
some important organ or affection, of which the chill is the first
stage. When a chill is present it is impossible to say, with certainty,
whether or what further derangement will ensue. But it is quite certain
an abnormal condition is already present, with the probability that it
will develop some disease or inflammation, of which we now have the
first or forming stage. Usually the length and violence of the chill is
in proportion to the importance of the organ attacked, and the character
of the morbid influence.

The _direct_ causes of a chill are: exposing the animal to cold
draughts; allowing him to drink freely of cold water, in very hot or
during very cold weather; exhausting him with labor and then placing him
in a damp stable; washing the legs with cold water, or riding him (while
in a state of perspiration), into a stream of cold water.

SYMPTOMS.—The symptoms which are usually observed before the chili
proper sets in, are: dullness or want of spirit on entering a stable
after a journey; hanging of the head; standing fixedly in one place;
taking little or no notice when spoken to; smelling at the food; picking
amongst it for a short time and then leaving it altogether. In addition
to these, the eye is dull and countenance dejected; the animal grinds
his teeth and breathes quicker than usual, while the pulse is rarely or
never disturbed at the commencement. Soon the coat will begin to prick
and the animal will begin to tremble with considerable violence; his
breathing will become more hurried, attended with a harsh blowing sound
in the nasal passages; the pulse still retaining its usual slow beat.
Sometimes the breathing becomes quick, hurried and loud “panting.” This
condition may continue half an hour, or even two hours or more, when the
patient will become more quiet, the breathing softer, more tranquil, the
skin and extremities warmer, and the pulse rises to fifty or even sixty
beats to the minute. From this condition the attack may, under judicious
treatment, pass off, and speedy recovery ensue; or, it may pass into a
Catarrhal Fever, or Pneumonia, or Bronchitis, or Lymphitis, or
Laminitis, or Inflammation of the bowels, or what is quite common, a
bad, obstinate cough.

TREATMENT.—With as little delay as may be, the patient should be
comfortably housed and blanketed, and fifteen drops of A.A., should be
given. If not better in half an hour, repeat it, and again at intervals
of half an hour, until the trembling and respiration have been relieved
and the chill has passed off. Then the animal may be safely left under
the influence of the same medicine, to be repeated every two or three
hours, so long as circumstances seem to require it.

Should any of the diseases above mentioned, or other, have become
developed, the treatment must be varied to meet that condition; the
particulars of which are to be sought under the respective sections in
this Manual. But it will most frequently be found that having met and
conquered the enemy at the threshold, but little more remains to be done
beyond care and rest, for the entire recovery of the animal.


                         Cold, Grippe, Catarrh

The nose and air-passages are lined with a delicate membrane, whose
office it is to secrete a thin mucous which lubricates the parts. Under
the influence of a chill, suppressed perspiration, etc., this membrane
becomes irritated, inflamed, and the discharge arrested, or it is
thickened, increased, or variously modified.

The symptoms usually are, the horse is not so lively as usual; he eats
little or no food; he coughs and sneezes; a watery discharge flows from
one or both nostrils, and also from the eyes, which are red and swelled.

In the more severe form, there is a chill, warm skin, quick pulse,
frequent and somewhat difficult breathing, sore throat, pain in the
throat when pinched, frequent cough, rough coat, bound bowels, red eyes,
and red and I dry nose; tears flow freely, and little or no food is
eaten—all symptoms indicating a catarrhal fever. As the animal improves,
the discharge from the nose becomes white or yellowish, and more
profuse.

Where numerous horses are attacked about the same time, the symptoms
assume a more severe form, attended with a greater degree of prostration
than in cases of common cold, and it then merits the name of INFLUENZA.
The symptoms of one year vary from those of another, and during the same
season all animals are not handled alike, though the general outline
will be the same. The attending fever is of a low grade, comes on
suddenly, and soon reaches its height, and lowness of spirits and
weakness are predominant. The symptoms are often as follows:

The horse is dull, low-spirited, and easily tired; he yawns and hangs
his head; his coat stares; sweats easily, and breathes quickly, when
slightly worked or moved. He eats little or nothing. As the disease
advances, the skin is sometimes hot and again cold; the mouth and tongue
are dry and hot; the white of the eye and nose are red; the bowels
bound; urine scanty; the eyelids swelled, partly closed, tears flow down
the face and fret the skin. The sides of the nostrils are also fretted
by the acrid discharge from them, which is sometimes very profuse. The
throat may be so inflamed that swallowing is attended with pain and
difficulty—the animal “quids” his food, and splashes the water with his
muzzle, being afraid to swallow either fluid or solid food. The throat
is painful, hot, and swelled on the outside; the glands are also
swelled, hard and painful, and sometimes come to a head. The cough is
frequent, sometimes coming on in fits, and breathing is sometimes quite
obstructed and difficult. When the disease has lasted some time, the
dung is slimy and mixed with blood, and the discharge from the nose is
sometimes bloody.

A common cold may terminate in inflammation of the bronchia or lungs, by
extending downward, or it may be cured and expend itself merely in the
nose and throat. So an Influenza may extend and involve the pulmonary
tissue, and is far more grave than is usually supposed.

TREATMENT.—When the disease commences with a chill, or any considerable
degree of fever is present, give fifteen drops of A.A., and repeat it
several times, at intervals of one or two hours. Then alternate the
Remedy E.E., with the fever medicine, at intervals of two or three
hours, until the disease is broken up and the horse is well. In case of
Influenza, even with very threatening symptoms, the E.E., and A.A.,
should be given alternately, say every two hours, in doses of fifteen
drops; keeping the animal well covered and in a warm stable. After all
the feverish symptoms have disappeared, only the E.E., will be required,
and the intervals between the doses may be prolonged as the animal
improves. In case the discharge from the nose is profuse or thick and
excoriating, or when the sore throat is present, or predominates, C.C.,
is better than the E.E., and may be given alone, or better, in
alternation with A.A.

When the _legs become swelled_, with _scanty urine_, H.H., should be
interposed, either alone or in alternation with C.C., at the same
intervals and doses, and this may be continued to the conclusion of the
case, either alone or in alternation with the E.E.


                   Influenza—Pink Eye—Horse Distemper

This disease is well known among horse dealers, and in the stables of
all our large cities. It is not so often found in the open country, but
cases occur where green or young horses are taken from pasture and
subjected to the closer atmosphere and changed diet of a warm stable. It
is generally found among green horses who have been brought from the
country to our large cities for sale or use, and quite, a large
proportion of all such horses are more or less seriously affected by it.
The disease is really a Catarrhal Influenza, whose symptoms are
variously modified and only possibly received the now generally accepted
name of PINK EYE, from a frequent appearance of the eye in the earlier
stages of the malady. The supposed causes have been sufficiently above
hinted.

SYMPTOMS.—There is a wide diversity in the symptoms, but the more common
manifestations are as follows: The horse is first observed to be
_dumpish_, dull and disinclined to move, or moving clumsily, and looks
as if he had been sick; the vessels of the eye are distended, turgid,
the inner lid and corners being unnaturally red (whence, probably, the
name), the lids become swollen, the animal shrinks from the light and
tears trickle over the eyelid, and lumps of purulent matter occasionally
gum up or fill the angles. The head seems heavy and hangs down, or he
rests it upon the manger. First one hind leg and then the other swells
and becomes infiltrated with fluid, extending from the fetlock up and
filling the sheath, and often along under the belly with an immense
infiltration of fluid. This swelling is considered characteristic, comes
on suddenly, affects the whole limb, groin and sheath. The hair from the
first looks unhealthy, and has a rough feeling; the ears, nose and limbs
are cold or wet, according to the stage of the disease. The appetite is
poor from the first, and an attempt to swallow shows that the throat is
sore; the fauces will be found inflamed, the tongue is foul, thickly
coated, and saliva runs freely, though in some cases the mouth is dry
and feverish; the dung is voided in small quantities, as all the
functions seem torpid. In some cases the glands of the neck become
involved, tenderness and swelling is found on examination, and this
swelling may soften and terminate in an abscess under the jaw. There is
not unfrequently a cough. After a few days, a discharge from the nose
sets in, which is considered a favorable crisis.

TREATMENT.—The patient should have the benefit of a pure atmosphere—the
more elevated, pure and uncontaminated, the better to arrest blood
deterioration—and be covered according to the temperature of the stable
and season. The limbs may be rubbed and clothed if cold, but not rubbed
if they are hot and feverish. In the febrile stage, the natural covering
is sufficient. Fat horses need but trifling food, and bran mashes,
scalded spout feed, or green food in moderation are best until the turn
of the disease.

Give with the first indication of the disease, the A.A., which repeat at
intervals of three hours, in doses of fifteen drops. This may be
continued one, two or more days, so long as the pulse is quick, mouth
hot, or general fever, or swelled, reddish eyes. When, however, _the
throat_ is found to be sore, _glands_ under the jaws _swelled or tender_
on pressure, or there is a discharge from the nose, the C.C., is more
appropriate, and should be substituted for the A.A., and the same doses
given at the same intervals. If, however, there is yet with the above
fever and heat, the two remedies may be given alternately—first A.A.,
then C.C., at intervals of three hours between the doses.

After the _legs_ and _sheath_ have begun to swell, the H.H., is in
order, and should be given to rouse into activity the urinary secretion,
and so reduce the swelling. Give then the H.H., every three hours, in
alternation with the C.C., and so continue until the disease is arrested
and the patient is convalescent. Too great care cannot be exercised when
the legs are swelled, to _let the horse stand_, not to move or exercise
the patient, as the movement or exercise while the legs are swelled or
hot, invariably aggravates the difficulty, and may cause it to extend to
the lungs or other important organs. Take the feed away, or keep the
feed very low, no grain, only a bran-mash, or pick at a little hay, and
let the horse stand, and the swelling will disappear with the use of the
medicines mentioned. If from cold or exposure, or an extension of the
morbid process, the _lungs should become involved_ and Pneumonia be
present, the disease will require to be treated by the A.A., and E.E.,
as directed for that disease, which see.

Any weakness, or loss of appetite or condition, remaining as a sequel of
the disease, will be removed by the use of J.K., giving fifteen drops
three times a day.


                                 Cough

Cough is so well known as to require no description. It is in almost all
cases a mere symptom of some disease or morbid condition of the air
passages, such as a cold, bronchitis, catarrh, or other more serious
affection of the chest, upon the cure of which it disappears. In some
cases, however, this affection is so slight as to occasion only cough as
a symptom of its existence, and the cough may be said to be idiopathic.
Continued cough predisposes to inflammation, yet some horses have a
slight cough for years without being otherwise unwell. Other coughs are
connected with thick wind, broken wind, glanders, worms and indigestion.

TREATMENT.—For chronic coughs fifteen drops of E.E., morning and night.
In complicated or recent cases, the Remedy may be given four times per
day. Sometimes the A.A., is more efficient, even when no fever or heat
is apparent. For catarrhal coughs, give C.C., either alone or in
alternation with A.A.


               Heaves, Broken Wind, Thick Wind, Whistles

These are merely varieties of nearly one and the same pathological
condition, and the distinctions lead to no practical result in my method
of treatment.

THICK WIND is generally the result of an imperfectly cured bronchitis or
pneumonia, leaving either the mucous membrane of the bronchia
permanently thickened, or some portions of the lung more or less
solidified, thus impairing its capacity and diminishing or destroying
its elasticity. Hence, the horse when exercised, especially up hill,
breathes short, hurriedly, and more laboriously than in health. This
causes much distress, the horse expands his nostrils, heaves, pants and
breathes with difficulty.

BROKEN WIND is the result of _emphysema_ of the lungs, that is, the
minute air-cells in certain portions of the lungs become dilated, lose
their elasticity or power of contraction, and breaking one into another,
form variously-sized sacks of air, the entrance to which becomes closed,
so that this air remains resident in the lungs and so far destroys its
use. Spasm of the air-tubes acts in a similar manner, hence it may come
and go, but the former condition is more or less permanent. Spasm, or
disease of the midriff, is frequently connected with it. The usual
symptoms are: the flanks are slowly drawn up until they have a tucked up
appearance, when they suddenly fall down. The act of forcing the air
_from the lungs_ is far more difficult, and requires longer time than to
_inspire_ or draw it in. There is also a short, weak, wheezing cough,
rough, dry coat; greediness for food, yet the animal is thin and looks
poor; the belly is swelled with wind; oats often pass unchanged from the
bowels.

TREATMENT.—Some cases of broken and thick wind cannot be cured, as they
depend upon organic changes in the structure of the lungs, themselves
incurable, yet all can be benefited by the persistent use of the proper
remedies, and proper attention to food and work.

In all cases of this disease, of whatever variety, if recent or
extensive, give fifteen drops of E.E., noon and at night, and the same
of A. A., each morning. In old, long standing cases, give fifteen drops
of the A.A., every morning, and the same of E.E., at night, continuing
the treatment with perseverance.

FOOD.—As the animal suffers from want of space in the chest, so the
distension of the stomach with an undue quantity of food tends much to
increase the difficulty. Hence the most condensed form of food is best,
plenty of oats and little hay, but no chaff, straw, or bloating feed,
water in moderate quantities, but never to repletion until the day’s
work is over. Green food, carrots especially, are always useful. They
are readily digested, and are peculiarly beneficial to the respiratory
organs. On the contrary, bloating, flatulent, poor feed, will tend to
increase, and may even occasion, broken wind. The horse should not be
worked soon after a full meal.


                               Bronchitis

From exposure to wet and cold; sudden changes of weather; turning the
horse into a cold, wet place, or bringing him from grass to a warm
stable; standing in a draft of cold air, or washing the warm, sweating
skin and not drying it afterwards, an inflammation of the bronchial
tubes and minute air-cells takes place, meriting the name of BRONCHITIS.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease generally begins with a slight cough, quick
breathing, sore throat, low spirits, dislike of food, slight discharge
from the nostrils, pain of the throat when pinched, and some difficulty
of swallowing. In some cases, it comes on suddenly with shaking; the
legs, ears and muzzle are at one time hot and at another cold; the skin
is rough and staring; the head hung down; mouth hot; the animal remains
standing, and does not wish to move; pulse is full and quick; the cough
short, frequent, and irritating; the breathing quick and difficult; the
eyes and nose red, and rattles are heard in the windpipe at the breast.
A profuse discharge of matter from the nostrils indicates the period
from which improvement commences.

TREATMENT.—Give fifteen drops of A.A., and E.E., alternately every three
hours, beginning with A.A. After a day or two, as the animal improves,
the intervals between the doses may be prolonged to four or six hours.
Keep the animal well covered and protected until recovery takes place.
After the feverish symptoms have disappeared the E.E., may be relied
upon.

STABLING AND FOOD.—In all cases of serious disease of the lungs or
air-passages, the horse should be placed in a large, roomy stable or
stall, into which the fresh air may freely come, but all damp draughts
of air excluded; all dung, damp and dirty straw carefully removed;
spread clean straw on the floor; blanket him according to the season,
the state of the weather, and skin; hand-rub and flannel bandage the
legs every night and morning, or oftener if necessary.

For food, bran mashes, gruel, and tempered water only; when recovering,
malt or bran mashes, boiled oats, turnips, carrots, and green food, if
in season.


                 Inflammation of the Larynx, Laryngitis

The larynx is the upper portion of the windpipe, and inflammation of it
sometimes occurs and is very dangerous. It is not often unmixed, but is
generally accompanied with, or is an extension of, cold or bronchitis,
and its causes are the same.

It is sometimes a dangerous disease, and may kill by suffocation or
degenerate into bronchitis, or pneumonia. It is recognized by the
difficulty of respiration, WHICH IS LOUD AND HEARD AT A DISTANCE.

The outside of the throat is hot, painful and swelled; swallowing is
sometimes difficult, and the fluid even may return by the nose; the
breathing is short and difficult, and when the air is drawn into the
lungs, a rough, harsh sound is heard in the larynx; the cough, at first
short and hard, becomes more hoarse and feeble, and occurs in fits,
especially during an attempt to swallow; the pulse is quick, hard and
full, and skin hot. As the disease advances the breathing becomes more
difficult, and is attended with a rasping, crowing sound, the neck is
straightened and held stiffly, the head raised and larynx drawn towards
the breast, the nostrils are widened, the nose lead colored, the eyes
red, skin damp with sweat, the pulse becomes weak and irregular, and at
last from the increasing narrowness of the windpipe, the horse actually
dies for want of breath.

TREATMENT.—The treatment is by no means difficult or complicated. Give
fifteen drops of A.A., every hour, during the violence of the disease,
and until the difficult breathing has abated and the animal becomes
comparatively easy. Then the intervals may be prolonged to two and then
to three hours, or more, until entire relief is obtained. If a cough
remains, the E.E. may be given in alternation, with the A.A.

Should the windpipe be very sore to the touch outside, it may be
occasionally bathed with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL with advantage.


                              Nasal Gleet

This is the term applied to an old, long standing, running from the
nose. It arises from a morbid condition of the lining membrane of the
nose, and is often the result of a badly treated or neglected cold,
especially in old, worn out horses, and is similar to catarrh in the
human species. Sometimes a diseased tooth in the upper jaw may give rise
to a similar discharge, but this is not a true gleet. An almost
incredible quantity of thickened mucous of different colors sometimes
passes, if the horse is at grass, almost as green as the food on which
he lives; or if he be stabled, white, straw-colored, brown, or even
bloody, and sometimes evidently mingled with matter or pus; and either
constantly running, or snorted out in masses many times in the day.
Sometimes the discharge comes only from one nostril, at other times both
nostrils are affected; in some cases the glands under the jaw are
enlarged, in other cases no enlargement can be discovered; perhaps after
the discharge has been very copious for some time it suddenly stops, and
the animal remains free from any discharge for several weeks, when it
comes on again as bad as ever; generally speaking, exercise increases
the discharge. Horses affected with this disease have been known to
continue free from any discharge for six or eight weeks, whilst they
have continued to rest; they have been taken to work, and in a day or
two the discharge has returned as bad as before.

SYMPTOMS.—The discharge is yellowish or like cream and in some cases
greenish. It may be discharged in clots, or of some thickness,
constantly flowing, or snorted out in quantities; it may come from both
nostrils, but generally only from the left. The glands under the left
jaw are often fixed, hard, and painful. The membrane of the nose has a
lead color. The discharge may stop for a time, and then come on again,
more profuse than before. After continuing a long time, the animal
becomes thin and poor, and may finally die.

TREATMENT.—Give fifteen drops of C.C., three times per day. It will be
found quite sufficient to entirely control and finally arrest it in
recent cases, and will not fail to benefit even the most inveterate.


             Pleurisy, Pneumonia, Inflammation of the Chest

The pleura is the delicate serous membrane, covering the lungs with one
surface, and lining the cavity of the chest with the other. Systematic
writers treat of the inflammation of this membrane, Pleurisy, and that
of the substance of the lungs, Pneumonia, separately. But as this rarely
occurs in fact, and leads to no practical result in the treatment, and
indeed can be rarely detected before death, I prefer the more practical
course of treating them together. An inflammation of the lungs rarely or
never remains so, but eventually involves the pleura more or less, and
so an inflammation of the pleura always involves more or less
extensively, the pulmonary substance.

CAUSES.—Catarrh, Influenza, Cold, or bronchial irritation may, either of
them, terminate in this disease if neglected, or from fresh exposure. A
sudden transition from heat to cold; change from a warm stable to a
colder one; neglect of the usual blanketing, or even of other comforts;
hard and long riding against a cold wind in snowy weather; loitering in
an exposed, bleak place, when the horse is fatigued and warm, without
covering. It sometimes occurs when horses are suddenly turned out to
grass, or when they have been taken up and turned into a very warm
stable. Injuries, contusion, rupture, or great violence done to the
chest, is quite sure to be followed by Pleurisy.

SYMPTOMS.—For conveniences sake, we will indicate the symptoms of these
two branches of the disease separately. Pleurisy invariably commences
with shaking all over, followed by a hot, dry mouth, white coated
tongue, red nose and eyes, low spirits, want of appetite, anxious look,
and hard, quick, wiry pulse. The act of drawing the air _into the lungs_
is short, and stops, or is cut off at a certain point, at which time the
pain is felt; the act of forcing the air _from the lungs_ is full and
slow. The pain is increased by coughing and taking full breath which the
horse will do if suddenly moved or frightened. If the inflamed side is
pressed upon, he gives forth a sound like a grunt; the cough is short;
the horse remains standing; the skin on the inflamed side is thrown into
folds, and twitches are occasionally seen at the same place. The
painfulness of the spaces between the ribs when pressed upon, is quite
characteristic, and often exists to an intense degree. The horse shrinks
from it with a low grunt, and tries to get away. The skin about the
sides of the nostrils and at the ends of the mouth is wrinkled. The neck
is lengthened, and nose thrust forward; the horse stands in a crouching
manner, and seems uneasy, but does not move. As the disease advances,
the pulse becomes more frequent, and afterwards smaller, until it can
scarcely be felt; the breathing becomes quicker and more painful and
catching, when the air is drawn into the lungs. Then by degrees, no
catch is seen or grunt heard, the twitches are not observed, cold,
clammy sweats break out over the body, the horse appears dull and
stupid, and death closes the scene.

The pleura, like all serous membranes, has a strong tendency to
effusion, or exudation of fluid, during an inflammatory action, and in
the course of the disease, this effusion, consisting of yellowish serum,
is exuded, in quantities varying from a few ounces to a bucket full. It
occurs in all severe cases, and the fluid either is again absorbed, if
in small quantity, or is the immediate cause of death, if in very large
quantity, or a lesser amount may remain for a long time, impeding
respiration, and forming an empyema or dropsy of the chest. When it
exists, the breathing is always labored, and there is _œdema_ or tumid
swelling of some external part, generally the abdomen, chest, or point
of the breast.

By listening with the ear against the chest, the progress of the
effusion may be traced from below upward. Above it will be heard the
loud crackling respiration and grating peculiar to the disease; below,
the dullness and stillness of the lung enveloped in fluid, the absence
of sound, marks the line of the accumulated fluid, its increase and
diminution.

IN PNEUMONIA, the symptoms differ from Pleurisy, yet the difference
manifests itself in this, that in _Pleurisy_ there is more pain, and in
_Pneumonia_ more difficult breathing. Pneumonia is often a consequence
of a cold, bronchitis, or the termination of some disease of the
air-passages, and may begin with symptoms of a cold—rough coat, want of
appetite, low spirits, etc. In other cases, it begins with a shivering
chill; the legs, ears and skin are cold; the coat is rough; the nose
pale and dry; quick pulse, which afterwards becomes frequent and full;
breathing at first quick, then panting and heaving; the skin now becomes
hot, except _the legs, which remain very cold_. This is a
_characteristic symptom and will never deceive_; the nose and eyes are
red; mouth hot and dry; the eyes have a yellowish color, and the horse
looks uneasy and restless.

As the disease extends, the breathing becomes more difficult, and is
attended with heaving of the flanks; the nostrils are much widened; the
nose and head held out; the neck lengthened; the forelegs are fixed in
one place, and spread apart; the nose and eyes have a dark blueish
color; the face looks anxious and disturbed; _the legs_ and ears are
_very cold_; the legs seem fine, and the hair upon them glossy; the
cough is more frequent, hard and painful; the horse seems drowsy; there
is no appetite; the dung is hard and covered with slime, and the urine
high-colored and scanty.

In the last stage, the pulse is small, weak, and can scarcely be felt,
the breathing is quicker and more difficult; the breath is very hot; the
eyes and nose are lead colored; the skin is cold, and clammy sweat
breaks out upon it here and there; the mouth is cold; the tongue is
coated; the teeth are ground every now and then, and twitches are
occasionally seen. The eyes become more and more heavy, glassy and dim;
the strength becomes less and less; the horse leans against the stall or
manger, or wanders around; he staggers and falls; tries to rise, but
cannot; groans, struggles and dies.

As an improvement takes place, the horse appears more natural, warmth
returns to his extremities, his breathing is more free, pulse softer,
fuller and less frequent, cough easier, _and he lies down_ quietly, and
without uneasiness. These good symptoms rarely or never deceive.

Placing the ear against the ribs, upon various parts of the chest, we
may learn with some practice to distinguish the progress of
inflammation. In the healthy lung, the air passes in with a slight,
rustling murmur, quite characteristic, and which, once heard, will
always be recognized. As the lung becomes inflamed, “crepitation” takes
place and we hear a sound, slightly cracking, like that made by salt
thrown into the fire, or by rubbing the hair between the fingers close
to the ear. As by degrees the lung becomes more intensely inflamed, it
is more and more impervious to the air, until it becomes “hepatized” or
solid, and gives no sound, and no resonance when percussed, or struck
upon. These changes are interesting, and afford to the practised ear
clear indications of the state and progress of the disease.

TREATMENT.—Give fifteen drops of A.A., every two hours, for the first
twenty-four hours. After that, give the E.E., alternately with the A.A.,
at intervals of two or three hours between the doses.

Continue this treatment steadily and uniformly by night as well as by
day, if the attack is severe, giving no other medicine, and making no
deviation. After a day or two, with the remission of the more violent
symptoms, the A.A. may be omitted entirely, and only the E.E. given, as
also after the disease has turned, and during convalescence. After the
horse has commenced to improve, a dose of E.E., every four hours during
the day, will be sufficient. The treatment is the same whether symptoms
of Pleurisy or Pneumonia predominate.

Stabling and food as under Bronchitis.

We should bear in mind that in all severe cases of this disease,
resolution does not take place under four days, and if an improvement
takes place in one, two or three days, we should be satisfied. Rare
indeed will be the cases that do not terminate favorably under
Humphreys’ Homeopathic practice, carefully applied.




                         CHAPTER VIII.—PART I.
                    DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE ORGANS


                    Dentition or Difficult Teething

The cutting or shedding of the teeth, and especially of the tushes, is
sometimes attended with considerable disorder of the body. The animal
either will not eat his food, or he has pain and difficulty in chewing
it; the body grows thin; bowels are out of order; humors may break out
in the skin, and there may be cough and slight fever present. The gum is
hot, painful and swelled.

TREATMENT.—Give fifteen drops of A.A., three times per day. This soon
relieves the feverish irritation, and the tooth usually makes its way
quietly to the surface. Nicking the gum directly over the tooth in the
form of a cross is sometimes beneficial. If teeth are very slow in
coming, showing an evident deficiency of bony deposit, an oyster shell
burned to lime, and broken or ground in his feed, will promote the
growth and production of bone, and be of service.


                      Diseased or Irregular Teeth

Sometimes the teeth of a horse present irregularities. Some of the teeth
are too long, or become ragged. As a consequence, the tongue or cheeks
are wounded, and the horse eats imperfectly, has pain, drops or “quids”
his food. Whenever this condition is found, if the difficulty does not
mend itself, the long teeth should be extracted if loose, or be filed
down, and the points of the ragged teeth smoothed off.

Decayed teeth produce similar symptoms. In addition, a bad smell exudes
from the mouth; stringy saliva flows away in large quantities, and the
eyes may be inflamed. If allowed to remain, the fang may become
diseased, the socket and gum inflame, an abscess form, and a portion of
the jaw-bone may die. If in the upper jaw, the matter may burst into the
nose and be discharged. It is of bad smell and color, and has been
mistaken for nasal gleet and glanders.

_Examine carefully with the finger_, and by feeling along the jaw, see
if there is any swelling or indentation, or if there is any old stub or
loosened tooth, a milk tooth that has been pushed one side, or down, or
is loose, making the gum inflamed or painful and preventing the animal
from properly eating his food. If so, remove the stub or loose tooth, or
file off the ragged portion, so that the mouth may become sound and
healthy. Sometimes a thick, unhealthy discharge from the nostrils has
been mistaken for glanders, when the real difficulty was from diseased
teeth.

TREATMENT.—Draw out the diseased tooth, and give fifteen drops of A.A.,
each morning, and the same dose of C.C., at night, for several days.


                                 Lampas

Occasionally the bars of the mouth swell and rise to a level with, and
even beyond, the teeth, occasioning soreness, pain, and difficulty of
eating. It is most common in young horses, in connection with the
cutting and shedding of teeth, from congestion and the extension of the
inflammation of the gums during this process. It also occurs in old
horses; for the growth of teeth in horses continues during life.
Derangement of stomach, or worms, is sometimes connected with it.

TREATMENT.—Give fifteen drops of A.A., two or three times per day. This
will soon relieve the irritation and swelling. Should there be any
derangement of the digestive organs, a few doses of J.K., given morning
and night, will promptly relieve not only the derangement of the
stomach, but the Lampas also.

Swelling or soreness of the gums will be promptly relieved by giving
fifteen drops of J.K., daily, or even, morning and night.

The searing of the bars with a hot iron, as is sometimes practiced by
cruel and ignorant smith’s, cannot be too strongly condemned. It
tortures the horse to no purpose, renders the mouth callous, and
destroys the delicacy and sensibility of a part upon which all the
pleasure of driving and riding consists, while it is totally
unnecessary.


                              Crib-Biting

Much has been written about crib-biting or wind sucking. It has
sometimes been regarded as a vicious habit and at other times as
connected with indigestion. However, there is much better basis for
believing it to be a bad habit than anything else.

Horses that are worked regularly every day rarely develop it; and it is
only among horses which are only used occasionally, and which stand for
long hours in the stall, that we find it. Also in a stable of the latter
kind if one horse starts it the others soon follow his example.

TREATMENT.—Many things have been tried, but the best results have been
obtained by giving the horse plenty of regular work. If there is any
disturbance of the digestive organs which has been occasioned by the
wind sucking J.K. would be the proper remedy.


                            Loss of Appetite

Loss of appetite, or diminished appetite, is but a mere symptom of some
more general affection. It is a symptom of almost every disease, and
especially of every morbid condition of the digestive organs. There are
cases, however, in which this seems the most prominent symptom; and the
animal appears well in every other respect, save that he does not eat.
The teeth should be examined, and, if needful, corrected. We should see
also if the throat is sore. In general, loss of appetite will be found
connected with a morbid or unhealthy condition of the digestive organs,
and will yield to a few doses of J.K., fifteen drops, morning and night.
This is also the appropriate remedy for defective appetite or the
weakness which often remains after acute disease.


                       Ill Condition, Indigestion

In consequence of over-feeding, bad food, suddenly changing the kind of
food, working the horse too soon after eating too much food, or bad and
uneven teeth, which prevent the horse from chewing his food well, the
following condition presents itself:

SYMPTOMS.—The skin has the condition known as hidebound; the horse
sweats easily; he is weak, and cannot work so long or with so much
spirit as in health; he is thin and does not fatten; his tongue is foul;
mouth slimy; the dung is dry, mixed with undigested oats, or it is slimy
or bad smelling; the water is variable, scanty and thick, or clear and
abundant, and there is a short, frequent cough. Sometimes he eats very
greedily, and at others will eat nothing placed before him, or will take
one kind of food and leave another, or he likes dirty straw or his
bedding better than the best oats or hay, or, in some instances, his
morbid appetite leads him to lick the wall or eat plaster from it.

It is sometimes accompanied by dullness or dizziness (stomach staggers).

TREATMENT.—Correct the feeding. Give not too much, and only that most
acceptable at first. Give J.K., three times per day for a week, then
J.K. morning and noon, and I.I., at night.


                                 Colic

This is one of the most common diseases of the horse. The passage of
food along the bowels is effected by the alternate contraction and
relaxation of the muscular coat of the intestines. Hence it is easy to
perceive that flatulent or irritating food, food in too large
quantities, large quantities of green food that produce much gas, masses
of hard, dry dung, or sudden chill upon the warm skin, all may produce
irregular contraction of the intestines, and hence produce pain and
colic. Tumors, worms and stones also produce the same result.

SYMPTOMS.—In colic the attack begins suddenly. The animal is uneasy;
shifts his position, paws or stamps the ground, kicks his belly with his
hind feet, looks frequently at his flanks, groans, falls upon the ground
and rolls about violently, or lies on his back, in which posture he
remains for a short time, seeming quiet and free from pain. Soon,
however, the pain comes on again, even with symptoms of greater
intensity than before. He throws himself widely about, careless of the
injuries he receives during these moments of agony and tossing. He
grinds his teeth, bites the manger, and looks towards his flanks with a
wild, anxious expression. If he improves, the paroxysms become less
frequent and less violent, and free intervals longer, until entire
relief; or if worse, the pain becomes more and more intense, paroxysms
more frequent, until there is no free intervals; inflammation results,
the ears and legs become cold, pulse small and wiry, and the animal dies
from the results of the inflammation.

Many of the symptoms of colic are similar to those of inflammation of
the bowels, and as the latter is by far the most formidable disease, we
will endeavor to distinguish them, so as to avoid mistake.

The attack of colic is sudden, while that of inflammation is more
gradual. In colic, the pulse is rarely quickened, and never so early in
the disease, while in inflammation it is very quick and small even from
the first.

In colic, the legs and ears are of the natural temperature. In
inflammation, they are cold. In colic, there is relief from rubbing the
bowels, and from motion. In Inflammation, the bowels are very tender,
and motion vastly augments the pain. In colic, there are intervals of
rest, while in inflammation there is constant pain. In colic, the
strength is scarcely affected, while in inflammation there is great and
rapidly increasing weakness.

Attention to these peculiarities will enable one to distinguish between
the two diseases, and to avoid error in the treatment.

TREATMENT.—Give fifteen drops of F.F., on the tongue, and repeat the
dose every half, or even quarter of an hour, until relieved, omitting
the medicine altogether, or giving it at longer intervals as soon as the
amendment is perceived. We have in the F.F., a remedy which rarely fails
to arrest this disease.

If, at the commencement or during the progress of the disease, fever and
inflammatory symptoms should also exist, then alternate the A.A., with
the F.F., at the intervals mentioned.

If the attack has clearly been occasioned by an _over-feed_, or by bad,
heavy, indigestible food, it will be best to alternate the J.K., with
F.F., at the intervals directed.

The colic not unfrequently comes from the kidneys, which may be
suspected by the horse making frequent attempts at staling, or his
passing scanty, thick or bloody urine. In these cases, give fifteen
drops of H.H., every half hour, alone or in alternation, with the A.A.

Should there be suspicion that Bots or Worms are an exciting cause, the
D.D., may be alternated with F.F., fifteen drops every half hour or
hour.

N. B.—In cases of colic the greatest danger and the worst possible fault
is injudicious haste and giving _too many and improper things_.
Thousands of horses are killed by the drugs given to cure colic where
one dies of the disease itself. Give only HUMPHREYS’ REMEDIES, and at
the intervals as directed, however urgent as the case may appear. Your
success and safety are in following the directions implicitly.


                 Tympanitis, Drum-Belly, or Wind-Colic

This is merely a form of colic characterized by an enormous production
of flatulence. The pain is sharper, the animal more furious and violent
than in ordinary colic; the belly on both sides is more or less swelled
with wind; there are rumbling noises and frequent discharges of wind. It
is usually the result of eating or gorging with green, flatulent food.

TREATMENT.—Give fifteen drops of F.F., every half hour, or even more
frequently if the case is very urgent. It will soon be relieved.
Afterwards, a few doses of J.K., fifteen drops morning and night, will
be of benefit.


            Enteritis, Inflammation of the Bowels, Red Colic

There are two varieties of this disease, one in which the external coats
of the intestines are inflamed, and attended with constipation, and the
other, in which there is irritation of the internal mucous surface of
the intestines, and attended with purging.

The most frequent CAUSE is sudden cold upon a warm, perspiring skin, or
even a cold drink when very hot; over-fed horses, subjected to long and
severe exercise, are most liable to it; stones and hard dung in the
bowels; and especially colic badly treated, and drugged with all sorts
of medicines, often terminates in Inflammation of the Bowels.

The symptoms of this disease are very like those of colic, only in the
latter disease there are intervals of rest, or cessation of pain, and
there is little or no alteration of the pulse; whilst in inflammation of
the bowels there is _no abatement of the pain_, but the animal is
continually lying down and rolling about, getting up and then dropping
down suddenly. The pulse is very much quickened, small and hard; the
artery appears like a cord, under the finger; the extremities are cold;
the animal frequently turns his head toward the flanks; the abdomen is
hard and tender; as the disease advances, the breathing becomes
accelerated, the eyes staring and wild, the pulse imperceptible at the
jaw; a cold sweat breaks out over the whole body. This state continues
for some time, when suddenly the animal appears to get better, he gets
up, and stands quietly; the eyes lose their lustre, the extremities
become deadly cold, there is a tremulous agitation of the muscles,
particularly the fore part of the body; after a short time, he begins to
totter and stagger about, and soon falls down headlong, and dies.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease begins, in most cases, with dullness, heavy eyes,
staring coat, restlessness and moving about from one place to another;
the pulse and breathing are both quickened; no appetite. Some cases
begin with colic, others with shivering. The animal paws, kicks, and
rolls about in the most violent manner at first; often strains and tries
to pass water, but either none or only a few drops come away; the pain
is most intense, and does not cease for an instant, and is increased by
pressure and moving about; the belly is hot, tucked up, and hard, unless
there is wind in the bowels, when it will be more or less swelled; the
bowels are very costive, though small, hard, dry masses may be passed,
except in cases where the internal surface, or mucous membrane, is the
seat of disease, in which case small, purging, bloody stools are
frequently passed; the legs and ears are intensely cold; the pulse small
and hard; and sweat in the latter stages breaks out all over. Still
further on, the pulse becomes smaller and weaker, until it can scarcely
be felt; the breathing is quick, irregular, and attended with sighs; the
skin is covered with a cold, clammy sweat; the eyes seem to have lost
their power of seeing, he becomes very weak; and trembles all over;
convulsions come on, and death soon follows.

Consider carefully the distinctions between Colic and inflammation, as
given under the article on Colic.

TREATMENT.—As early as possible, give fifteen drops of A.A., and repeat
the doses every half hour. After the animal is somewhat relieved,
continue the medicine at longer intervals. If not better in two hours,
the F.F., may be alternated with the A.A., at the intervals mentioned.
This will be especially indicated if there should be frequent purging
small stools, blood-stained or otherwise. After the inflammatory
symptoms have subsided, give a dose or two of the J.K.

N. B.—As constipation exists in inflammation of the bowels, many persons
suppose it to be the cause of the disease, and resort to the most
desperate means to remove it. This is all wrong. Remove the
inflammation, and the bowels will then move of themselves, while the
balls and cathartics administered during the inflammation will only
increase the difficulty.


              Peritonitis, Inflammation of the Peritoneum

The delicate membrane lining the abdominal cavity, and covering the
parts within it, is termed the peritoneum, and is occasionally the
subject of inflammation.

It not unfrequently follows the gelding of the horse, especially if he
is too soon afterwards turned out to grass, or during cold and wet
weather. Exposure to cold standing in draughts of air, or drinking cold
water may produce it; and it follows a stab in the belly or a rupture of
some of the viscera, and the flow of the contents into the abdomen.

SYMPTOMS.—A few days after cutting the colt, the yard and sheath will be
found swelled and painful; little or no matter flows from the cut; the
animal is restless and uneasy; the body is painful when pressed against,
and is swelled with watery fluid; the legs are cold; the bowels are
bound; the skin is rough and dry; no food is eaten; if loose, he rests
his hind quarters on the side of the stall; the swelling in the breast,
legs and sheath increases; the breathing becomes quick and painful; the
pulse hard, quick, and by degrees small and weak. These gradually become
worse, until the animal dies.

There is a slow form of this disease, as follows: poor appetite; low
spirits; uneasiness; occasional pawing the ground; looking at the belly
and groaning; belly painful when pressed upon, and tucked up; quick
breathing; small, weak pulse; bound bowels; awkward way of walking with
the hind legs; mouth dry; and bad smelling; body thin; coat staring and
unthrifty; urine scanty; weakness. As the disease advances, the abdomen
fills with a watery fluid, and the disease terminates as dropsy.

TREATMENT.—From the commencement, the A.A., is the most important
remedy, and may be given, fifteen drops, every two hours, during the
more urgent symptoms, and then at longer intervals for the acute form.

If there should be purging, alternate the F.F. with the A.A., at
intervals of two hours, and then leas frequently as the disease
improves.

In the slow form of the disease, the alternate use of J.K. and F.F.,
four times per day, will be found most effectual in preventing a
termination in dropsy, and in restoring the animal.


                   Jaundice, Yellows, Diseased Liver

Young horses rarely have diseased livers, but at the age of eight or
nine years, the disease is more common, and, in some cases, quite
suddenly, the covering of the liver gives way, and symptoms of fatal
peritonitis appear.

SYMPTOMS.—Jaundice, or Yellows, is more frequent, and is marked thus:
The animal is dull, sleepy, and unwilling to move; he eats little or
nothing; the coat stares; the urine is scanty; the dung light-colored
and in lumps. The nose, tongue, eyes and mouth become yellow, from the
abundance of bile in the blood. The urine is very thick, dark-colored
and full of bile. The right side is painful when pressed against, and
the horse looks towards it, he may be lame in the right fore-leg, or paw
the ground with it. These symptoms may increase, and cough, quick
breathing, and full, quick pulse, be added, which afterwards becomes
quite weak and slow, and the legs very cold. He then becomes more and
more dull, stupid and sleepy, staggers, falls to the ground, and dies.

TREATMENT.—Rarely will anything more be required than the J.K., of which
a dose of fifteen drops may be given, four times per day.

Should there be heat, fever or inflammatory symptoms, a few doses of the
A.A., will be proper, not merely for the heat and fever, but for the
obstruction of the liver as well. In severe cases, these two remedies
may be alternated with the most brilliant success, even when there is no
fever apparent. Give fifteen drops every four hours, alternately, first
A.A., next J.K., and so on.


                       Costiveness, Bound Bowels

This is usually a mere symptom of some other disease, upon the removal
of which the costiveness disappears. But sometimes, in consequence of
dry food, deficient action of the liver, want of exercise, or a
paralytic condition of the digestive organs, it may require attention.

TREATMENT.—The animal should have regular exercise, green food or bran
mashes night and morning, with but little oats, or other heating or dry
food. Give fifteen drops of J.K., night and morning, and the condition
will soon be corrected.


                             Bots and Worms

Bots in the horse, like worms in the human system, have usually a great
many sins to answer for, which are really chargeable elsewhere. It is a
principle in the economy of nature, that one animal should feed upon or
live within another, and hence every animal, and almost every organ,
also, has its peculiar parasite or inhabitant. Such parasites are rarely
injurious. In an unhealthy condition of the system, they may unduly
accumulate, and occasion some inconvenience, but they rarely feed upon
the surface to which they are attached, but only upon the contents of
the organs in which they exist.

The history of the bot, the most formidable of horse parasites, is as
follows: Towards the close of autumn, the female gadfly (octrus equi)
fixes its eggs upon the hair of the horse’s legs, by means of a sticky
substance, exuded with the egg. By means of the horse’s tongue and lips,
these eggs are carried to the mouth, and so on down to the stomach,
where the eggs, farther developed in the form of grubs, are attached, by
means of their hooks, to the sides of the organ, while their heads
remain floating in its fluids, upon which they feed. Having arrived at
maturity, they are separated, pass along the intestines, and are
expelled with the dung, after which they again burst their shell, and
rise in the summer in the form of the gadfly.

SYMPTOMS.—Some horses are supposed to suffer much from bots, while
others, in the most perfect health, have an abundance of them. Often
there are no symptoms to indicate their presence, but generally, the
horse loses flesh and strength, and can scarcely move about; he has
turns of griping pains in the belly; eats and drinks greedily; the oats
pass off undigested, and the dung has a bad smell. The only sure
criterion of the existence of bots or worms is their presence, hanging
about the anus, or mixed with the dung of the animal.

There are also the _long round worms_, similar to the common earth worm,
and the _small pin-norm_, half an inch or more in length, which show at
the anus, an inch or more in length, which often causes itching and
uneasiness at the anus.

TREATMENT.—To eradicate worms or bots from the system, give fifteen
drops of D.D., each night and morning, with regular and healthy feed,
and the worm symptoms will soon disappear.

For Colic or belly-ache, when supposed to be from bots, give fifteen
drops of the D.D., alternately with the A.A., every half hour or hour,
according to the urgency of the case. A few doses will usually relieve.

IN OBSTINATE CASES, when the Bots seem to be constitutional, give
fifteen drops of the D.D., every morning, and the same of J.K., every
night, and so continue until good health is established.


                          Salivation—Slavering

Many horses are subject to an increased flow of saliva from the mouth,
constituting what is known as _slavering_ or _driveling_ from the mouth.
The discharge is commonly, simply glairy slime, or at times—and
especially on being driven or excited—a simple froth, dropping or being
blown from the mouth. It may be caused by mercury if the horse has been
dosed with the drug; is often attributed to Lobelia or Indian tobacco,
if the horse only would eat it—but is more commonly the result of
swelled gums, irregular or deficient teeth, and irritated or inflamed
salivary glands, the result of bad digestion.

TREATMENT.—See that the teeth are in order, and give J.K., morning and
night.




                          CHAPTER IX.—PART I.
            DISEASES OF THE URINARY AND REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS


                 Nephritis, Inflammation of the Kidneys

The kidneys are not unfrequently the subject of inflammation in the
horse. It may be induced by powerful or repeated diuretics, such as
saltpetre, which is a most dangerous medicine, or from hard and long
riding by a heavy rider, or heavy weights; or by leaping or being
suddenly pulled up on his haunches, the inflammation being propagated
from the lumbar muscles to the kidneys, or by exposure to cold and wet,
by rain dripping upon his loins during exercise, and especially if these
organs have been previously weakened.

SYMPTOMS.—The early symptoms are those of fever, the pulse full, hard
and quickened, afterward becomes small and weak; the horse looks around
anxiously at his flanks; stands with his hind legs wide apart; is
unwilling to lie down; straddles as he walks; expresses pain in turning;
the back is somewhat arched; he shrinks when the loins are pressed upon,
and there is some degree of heat felt there. The urine is voided in
small quantities; frequently is high-colored, and sometimes bloody; and
there is frequent and often violent effort and straining, but the
discharge is very small, sometimes suppressed.

TREATMENT.—Give fifteen drops of H.H., and repeat every two hours.
Should there be very high fever, great heat, etc., the A.A., may be
alternated with it, giving fifteen drops every intermediate hour in
urgent cases, but in general the H.H., will be quite sufficient, and
should be continued at prolonged intervals to entire recovery.

But a few doses will be required to show us the great value and efficacy
of the remedy.


                 Cistitis, Inflammation of the Bladder

This disease is usually the result of giving diuretics, such as
saltpetre, cantharides, or similar irritating medicines. It may also be
the effect of a cold and exposure, or of a stone in the bladder, and the
disease may occupy the neck of the bladder, or the organ itself. The
symptoms are similar to that of Inflammation of the Kidneys; the horse
makes frequent and painful attempts to stale, but passes only a few
drops of water at a time. The bladder cannot retain the urine from its
excessive irritability, so that the attempt to void it is constantly
going on. The urine may be clear, or mixed with mucus, or stained with
blood.

THE TREATMENT is the same as for Inflammation of the Kidneys, the remedy
for that disease, H.H., being given every two hours, in doses of fifteen
drops, or less frequently, according to the urgency of the case. In some
cases the A.A., may be given in alternation, as for Inflammation of the
Kidneys; but in general, the remedy first mentioned H.H., will be found
every way efficient and available.


                       Hematuria, or Bloody Urine

This is usually a mere symptom of some other disease. Blows, or a
violent strain of the loins, some kinds of irritating plants, stones in
the kidneys or bladder; ulceration of the bladder; Spanish flies given
internally or administered as a blister—may either of them produce
bloody urine as a symptom.

The symptoms are: discharge of urine, mixed more or less with blood, or
containing clots. When the blood is caused by some disease of the
kidney, there is usually pain in walking, straddling of the hind legs,
and an awkward way of walking. If the blood comes from the kidneys, it
will be intimately mixed with the urine; but if from the bladder, it
will pass off with the last of the urine rather than the first.

TREATMENT.—Fifteen drops of the H.H., given three times per day, will
generally promptly relieve. If dependent upon organic disease, more time
may be required, but the remedy is the same. If it fails, give a large
spoonful of HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, poured upon the tongue three
times per day.


                           Retention of Urine

From holding the urine too long, cramp or spasm of the neck of the
bladder, stone in the bladder, or other disease, which prevents the
bladder contracting upon its contents, there may be retention, and the
animal unable to void his urine.

The symptoms are similar to those in colic, but characterized, however,
by the horse putting himself in the attitude of staling, and straining
with great force, as in the act of passing water, without any, or very
little, being discharged. This symptom may be present in cases of gripes
or colic, the bladder acting in sympathy with the cramped intestine. All
doubt may be removed by inserting the hand into the rectum, when the
bladder, if full, will be found large, tense and full of water.

This disease may be recognized by the animal frequently putting himself
in a position to pass urine, but without succeeding, or at most only a
few drops are voided; there is also great restlessness, shifting from
place to place, moaning, looking at the flanks, pawing with the
fore-feet.

TREATMENT.—A few doses, fifteen drops each, of the H.H., given at
intervals of two hours, will usually relax the spasm and afford entire
relief.

When it is the result of a stone in the bladder, the movements of the
horse may for a time dislodge it, but an entire cure will only be
effected by an operation, for which a veterinary surgeon must be
consulted.


                              Scanty Urine

This is a mere symptom of some other disease, such as fever,
inflammation, or other morbid condition, or it may occur naturally, if
there is diarrhea, loose bowels, or purging, and it always occurs in
warm weather, when a horse is severely worked, from the large quantity
of fluid exhaled from the skin and lungs.

A few doses, fifteen drops each, of the H.H., will soon correct the
condition, as far as the health of the animal requires. The J.K., for
indigestion is likewise efficient.


                     Diuresis, too Profuse Staling

In consequence of bad food, such as kiln-dried oats, mow-burnt hay, or
of such medicines as nitre, or other diuretics, a horse may have an
excessive flow of urine.

The symptoms are: The horse does not eat much, sweats easily, is soon
tired, the bowels are costive, skin dry and coat rough, tongue white and
there is great thirst. The water is quite clear and milky, passed often,
and in large quantities. As the disease advances, the horse eats little,
he gets thinner and weaker every day, breath often offensive; the dung
is hard, lumpy and covered with slime; the hair stands on end, and the
flow of urine becomes enormous. If not cured, death ensues.

TREATMENT.—The food must be changed, and none but the best given. Change
of food is always of service under such circumstances.

Give fifteen drops of J.K., four times per day. This will often be
efficient.

DIABETES MELLITIS, which is a rare disease in the horse should not be
confounded with DIURESIS, which is manifested by an _increased_ flow of
urine. In Diabetes Mellitis the water is clear or greenish, limpid,
_sweetish_, and soon accompanied with great debility and loss of flesh,
usually ending fatally.


                          Parturition in Mares

Rarely requires either manual or medicinal assistance. A dose of A.A.,
given in the earlier stages of labor often quiets the restlessness and
allays the wandering pains, and this conduces to the greater regularity
of the process.

If the labor becomes tedious or delays, a dose of G.G., repeated if
necessary every two hours, will relax the parts and assist the expulsion
pains.


                     Self-Abuse, Seminal Emissions

A very common habit among race horses is self-abuse. As soon as young
horses are stabled, from idleness, over-excitement or urinary
irritation, they may begin to masturbate, and it very often increases,
impairing their strength, and rendering them worthless and uncertain
foal-getters, or demanding castration. The phenomena are well known and
do not require a particular description.

The common practice with horsemen or trainers is to put on them what is
called a “net,” an apron armed with sharp pointed tacks, so when the
yard is protruded, the tacks prick him, and he draws it in. But many
horses, with a little practice, become so expert that they can avoid
striking the apron, and in most cases it seems rather to increase than
diminish the habit.

The usual Veterinary Surgeons advise camphor, which, if given is
sufficiently large quantities to diminish the habit, will notably and
permanently impair the vitality and vigor of the horse.

DR. HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY REMEDIES, by _arresting_ and _lessening_ the
_irritation_ and _morbid desire_, _prevent the habit_, and thus,
reducing the morbid desire, promote and increase the natural vigor and
development of the animal.

TREATMENT.—Give fifteen drops of G.G., three times per day, or if
urinary irritation is suspected use the H.H. instead. He should also
have good food and plenty of regular exercise. If unable to give him
exercise under saddle, he may be turned into a large pasture with
pregnant mares.


         Weak or Deficient Sexual Vigor; Impotence in Stallions

It not unfrequently happens that stallions of even good form and breed,
and not deficient from inherited weakness or vice become uncertain or
partially unfitted for foal-getting. This must of necessity arise late
in life from failing vitality, or deficient natural strength. But it not
unfrequently happens as a result of too early severe use, a drain put
upon the young at a time when nature was still building up and hardening
tissue, and when the over-drain made upon the green and yet unhardened
sire, was more than the nutrition could repair. And it is again liable
to happen from excessive use during the healthy, vigorous age of life,
and the more so, if coupled with insufficient proper nourishment.

Any or all of these causes may render a stallion uncertain, and so
diminish his value and the relative value of his services. It becomes
important to know what treatment will restore the feeble and uncertain,
and will preserve and arrest the decay, as well as restore these waning
powers.

In order to restore and invigorate the deficient or waning powers, and
to sustain them under severe tax, or upon the decline life, the J.K.,
may be given in confidence that it will sustain, restore and keep in
vigor the natural virile powers.

In cases, with only some decline in vigor, a dose of fifteen drops of
J.K., given two or three times per week is sufficient. When the want of
vigor is more decided, a dose, two or even three times per day may be
given.


                   Failure to come in Heat—Sterility

Failure to breed in the mare may occur in two different forms—first
impotence, in which the mare fails to come in heat, and second, true
sterility, in which, although she came in heat and was bred the service
proved unfruitful.

The first of these cases may be due to some malformation of the sexual
organs in which case it is incurable; but it is more often due to
insufficient or over-feed, or lack of exercise, or over-work, or some
depressing disease.

TREATMENT.—Correct the exercise and feeding, and give G.G., every night
for a week, or, if the case is urgent, a dose morning and night, and
then a dose daily until the result is manifest.

TRUE STERILITY may also be caused by malformations and be incurable, but
is more often caused by other things such as a catarrhal condition of
the vagina—Leucorrhea or too ardent heat, or insufficient food, or
debility from disease.

THE TREATMENT for Leucorrhea or a catarrhal condition of the organs,
which may be known by a constant or frequent discharge from the vagina,
give G.G., each morning and J.K., at night, and continue this for
several weeks, or until she is again served.

In addition dissolve one cake of fresh compressed yeast in a pint of
tepid water, then after a few hours, add another pint. Then wash the
vagina well with soap and water and use the dissolved yeast as a douche,
this should be done daily for several days.

Where there is an excess of excitement, too ardent or too frequent, or
even constant heat, give at first, H.H., a dose morning and night, for
two or three weeks, then a dose or two of G.G., and the result will
usually be satisfactory.

Where there is unthriftiness or want of good condition, correct the
feeding and give G.G., morning and J.K., at night.


                                Abortion

Abortion or premature birth may occur from three different causes:

1—ACCIDENTAL ABORTION.—Caused by a blow; strain; slipping on a wet
floor, over-strain from pulling a heavy load, etc.

2—ENZOOTIC ABORTION.—Due to some infectious disease of the mother.

3—CONTAGIOUS ABORTION.—A distinct disease which causes the death and
expulsion of the fetus or its expulsion in a feeble state prior to the
normal period.

SYMPTOMS OF THREATENED ABORTION.—In the first three months of pregnancy,
the appearance of a bloody, watery or mucous discharge from the vagina.
In the later months, uneasiness, swelling, heat and tenderness about the
udder; secretion of milk; and straining as if in labor.

TREATMENT OF THREATENED ABORTION.—Give fifteen drops of G.G., every six
hours, and the dose may be repeated two or three or more times should
the threatening symptoms continue after the first or even the second
dose has expended its action.

This interval should elapse between doses, as too rapid ones may even
defeat the object, by over-excitement of the system, while a single dose
often arrests an abortion if permitted to expand its action.

After a mare has actually aborted, it is almost impossible to tell
whether it occurred from contagious abortion or from some other cause,
so the safe thing to do is to act as if it had been contagious abortion.

TREATMENT OF CONTAGIOUS ABORTION.—The fetus and membranes should be
burned. The premises occupied by the sick animal should be disinfected
as follows: Remove all bedding and dirt possible and spray all available
parts of barn with 3% formalin or 5% carbolic acid solution. Apply white
wash containing 1 lb. chloride of lime to 3 gallons of whitewash,
scatter quicklime on floor and gutters.

The animal which has aborted should receive daily a vaginal irrigation
of two gallons of warm water containing 2% lysol until the vaginal
discharge stops. The external parts about the vagina, including the hips
and tail, should be washed thoroughly with soap and water and then with
the lysol solution as above, twice daily. This should also be done to
all exposed pregnant animals in the herd, being careful not to use the
same cloth, solution, bucket or attendant for the well animals that was
used for the sick one.

Also give G.G., at intervals of six hours.




                           CHAPTER X.—PART I.
                            GENERAL DISEASES


                               Rheumatism

This is a far more common disease of the horse than has generally been
supposed. It is quite common in old horses, and in younger ones that
have been exposed or over-worked. Cold and damp, and exposure to
draughts of cold air when heated, or during and after severe effort or
work, are among the most common causes.

SYMPTOMS.—It usually begins with a shivering chill, hot skin and mouth.
The horse becomes lame and stiff all over, and several joints seem
affected at once, so that he cannot move from the first, or else it soon
becomes confined to one joint or leg; the joint or limb becomes very
hot, swelled, and exceedingly painful; the pulse is quicker at one time
than another, or stops now and then for a moment or two; the breathing
is quick; sweats break out, and the animal becomes weak. When the
disease attacks the fore legs, farriers call it “chest-founder”; and
when it attacks the loins, the back is raised and belly tucked up, and
it is known as “loin-bound.” Rheumatism not unfrequently shifts from one
place to another, especially if the animal is exposed to wet and cold.

TREATMENT.—If there should be considerable heat and fever, as is most
commonly the case, give first A.A., a dose of fifteen drops, every two
or three hours, until the heat has been partially subdued, or until six
doses has been given. Then alternate the B.B., with the A.A., every
three or four hours, a dose of fifteen drops, until the animal is
restored. If a limb or joint is painful, hot and swelled, bathe it in
HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL night and morning, and a flannel bandage
applied to the limb will also be of great service, in addition to the
internal medicines.

If at any time a horse shows symptoms of stiffness or lameness, fifteen
drops of B.B., night and morning, will soon remove it.


                           Chronic Rheumatism

May be regarded as a continuance of an acute attack, or as is more
frequent a recurrence of it, being generally milder in character and
less painful. The general circulation, as indicated by the pulse and
respiration, is not much affected, and the manifestation of the disease
is usually confined to some form of lameness usually affecting one limb
at a time. Suddenness of the attack and change of its locality are
characteristic of the disease. Often after having been apparently cured
it returns after an uncertain interval or appears in another locality.
Limbs and tissues that have once suffered are more liable to a
recurrence, and it may be generally assumed that when a horse has once
had a siege of rheumatism and again has sudden lameness and pain, that
it is a return of the old disorder. Bad weather, exposure, or over-work
are the most frequent occasions of a recurrence of the attack. The
lameness most frequently attacks one or the other leg, or there may be a
general stiffness or lameness. Not unfrequently the lumbar or loin
muscles become the principal seat of the disease and the term _lumbago_
or _loin-bound_ is applied to it; or when the muscles or fibrous tissues
of the shoulder become affected, causing lameness of the forelegs, the
animal is said to have chest founder.

TREATMENT.—B.B., is usually the best remedy. If there is fever, heat or
some lameness, alternate A.A., and B.B., a dose every two hours. In old
cases, and to eradicate the disease from the system, give B.B., morning
and noon, and J.K., at night, not forgetting an occasional dose of H.H.,
to increase the action of the kidneys.


                   Fever—Swamp Fever—Blood Poisoning

FEVER is always a symptom of some other disease, never a disease of
itself. An injury to any part of an animal, may, by sympathy, set up a
fever in the rest of the body. However there are some cases where the
fever is the most pronounced symptom, as in Swamp Fever and Septicemia
or Blood Poisoning.

SWAMP FEVER or infectious Anemia is an infectious disease attacking
Horses and Mules. It is characterized by high fever and loss of flesh
and strength, with intervals of comparative good health, with no fever
and a voracious appetite and the animal apparently getting well; only to
be succeeded by another attack of fever, etc.

TREATMENT.—Since the disease can be readily caught by the other horses
and mules, separate the sick from the well. Then give the A.A. and I.I.,
alternately in doses of fifteen drops, at intervals of two hours at
first, and later at longer intervals as the animal improves.

BLOOD POISONING or Septicemia is the poisoning of the blood by germs or
their products. It occurs more or less in all infectious diseases, but
particularly the infection caused by a wound.

The symptoms are fever, rapid pulse, depression and weakness with
sometimes chills.

TREATMENT.—In all cases of Fever, the A.A., is the first and generally
the only remedy required. Give fifteen drops at intervals of two or
three hours, at first, and by degrees at longer intervals as the animal
improves.


                           Glanders and Farcy

The disease is termed Glanders when it is principally confined to the
head and nose, and called Farcy when manifesting itself in the
lymphatics.

SYMPTOMS OF GLANDERS.—_Constant_ discharge from one or both nostrils,
more frequently from one, and that the left; the discharge is at first
thin and watery, afterward thick like the white of egg. It may continue
in this way for some time, or it soon becomes more mattery, sticky, then
greenish or yellowish, or mixed with streaks of blood, and having a bad
smell. Soon after this discharge is noticed, the glands under the jaw
become painful and swollen, and one of them appears fixed to the
jaw-bone. Then the membrane lining the inside of the nose has a
yellowish or leaden color, which is considered characteristic of the
disease; small bladders are noticed upon it, which afterward are changed
to ulcers; these have sharp borders, and spread and deepen until the
gristle and bones beneath become ulcerated. When ulcers appear upon the
membrane of the nose, the constitution of the horse is evidently
involved; he loses flesh; his belly is tucked up; coat unthrifty and the
hair readily comes off; the appetite impaired; the strength fails;
cough, more or less urgent, may be heard; the lungs become filled with
abscesses, wasting goes on, and the animal soon dies.

FARCY.—Upon the face, lips and other portions of the body, but
especially upon the legs, hard, painful and hot lumps are felt, which
are called _Farcy buds_; they increase in size, with pain and heat,
until the ulceration works through the skin and a thin discharge flows
out. Between these lumps along the course of the lymphatics, hardened
cords are felt; the groin, inside the thighs, and space between the fore
legs and chest, become, from the tumefaction of these lymphatics,
swelled and very painful; the legs are swelled, together with the usual
discharge of glanders.

TREATMENT.—In suspected cases were the disease is not well developed or
recognized give fifteen drops of the C.C., every two hours.

N. B.—It should be remembered that a well marked case of glanders is
_highly contagious_. Not only may the disease be communicated to other
animals, but the glandered matter coming in contact with a cut, abraded
or sore surface in the human subject, will be liable to result as a very
severe, if not fatal, case of poisoning. Prudence demands that we should
handle such animals with great caution, and a thoroughly glandered
animal had much better be killed at once than endanger other animals or
the lives of human beings, and the more so as the chance of recovery in
such a case is very remote.


                Inflammation of the Lymphatics, or Weed

In some rare cases horses suffer from Inflammation of the Lymphatics,
manifested by cord-like swellings along the course of these vessels. It
may be brought on by sudden changes of food, cold and wet weather,
sudden over-work after several days of rest, disordered stomach,
standing in cold water, exposure to drafts of air etc.

THE SYMPTOMS are as follows: The attack is usually sudden, beginning
with a cold, shivering chill, followed by full, strong and quick pulse,
accelerated breathing; hot, dry mouth, and general fever. The local
manifestation is on one of the hind legs, generally the left, or in rare
instances, a fore-leg may be affected. The leg is lifted from the
ground, is hot and painful to the touch, and swells _from above
downward_. The swelling increases rapidly, the leg becomes much larger
than the other, the pain increases, and the leg is very sensitive to the
touch. Several hard, round and very painful cord-like swellings may be
felt on the inside of the leg; these end in small, hardish lumps, and
are more painful than the cords. A watery fluid exudes from the skin,
and may be seen in drops standing upon the hair.

TREATMENT.—At the commencement, foment the limb for an hour, night and
morning, with hot water, and afterward apply HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH
HAZEL freely. The horse should have plenty of exercise, and in most
cases may be ordered to his work, continuing the medicine as hereinafter
directed. Give, three times per day, fifteen drops of the A.A. After a
few days, the J.K., may be alternated with the former with advantage.
But in general the A.A., will be entirely sufficient.


                          Purpura Hemorrhagica

Some rare cases of this disease have been observed in the horse. It
consists essentially of a decomposition of the blood, and loss of power
in the capillary vessels, as the result of which echymosed or black and
blue spots appear on the surface, and upon the mucous membrane wherever
it can be seen, hemorrhages occur from various parts of the body and are
thrown off with the natural excretions. The inside of the nose is
covered with purple spots, as also the inside of the lips. These spots
vary in size, and are filled with dark-colored fluid blood, which exudes
if they are punctured or scratched. There is diffused swelling over the
system, showing itself at the eyelids, breast, flank, belly, quarters,
and between the thighs, extending upward. It is attended with weakness
and general prostration of the system, swelling and stiffening of the
joints, and sloughing off of the membrane of the nose, or other parts.

TREATMENT.—The A.A., will be found appropriate in all cases of this
disease. Give a dose of fifteen drops three times per day. If there are
hemorrhages from any organ, give half a gill of HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH
HAZEL three times per day, between doses of the A.A.

Give common food of good quality, less oats and hay, but especially
carrots and potatoes. The last are very serviceable in this disease.


                         Big Jaw—Actinomycosis

This disease is caused by the Ray fungus which is sometimes found on
barley, oats, cactus, dried grass, etc., and which enters the body of
the animal through cuts or wounds on the tongue, gums, etc., and
particularly with young animals at teething time.

SYMPTOMS.—These of course vary with the position of the wound, through
which the fungus entered the body. If on the tongue, the tongue becomes
swollen and very painful “wooden tongue.” If around the teeth, the jaw
becomes swollen and finally the growth breaks through the skin or into
the mouth. If through the skin of the head or neck, large nodules
appear, varying in size from a hazel nut to a man’s fist.

TREATMENT.—The most successful treatment is by cutting out the nodules;
this of course should be done by a Veterinary Surgeon.

We advise calling a Veterinary Surgeon and having him perform the
operation as soon as possible, as the disease is usually curable if
properly handled and it cannot be transmitted to man or to the other
animals.


                                Azoturia

This disease is somewhat common, and is often considered a paralysis
from this most frequently prominent symptom. But this condition is
really due to imperfect action of the liver and kidneys in failing to
eliminate only partially oxidized products and the transformation of
albuminoids into urea—thus producing the train of symptoms constituting
the disease. It mostly attacks animals out at grass, or those who have
been for a time idle on good feed, and are then put to active exercise
or work; beans, peas, or other like foods are also liable to produce it.
The autumn is its most frequent season of attack and mares seem to be
more liable to it than geldings.

SYMPTOMS.—These come on suddenly and without premonitions of disease.
The animal may be attacked in the stable after having been out for a
short time, after a period of rest. In the milder cases there is only
some _lameness_ and _muscular trembling_ of a particular limb, generally
the hind ones, without apparent cause, and on examination there is a
dusky brown color of the membrane of the eye and nose, and some
tenderness of the ribs when struck; the lameness may be such that the
animal may be scarcely able to walk, or may even go down altogether. In
other cases the horse is struck down at once from loss of motive power
in the loins and hind legs after having been driven only a short time
after an interval of rest. In other cases the attack is not so sudden,
the animal becomes very restless, perspires freely, seems to be in
violent pain, the flanks heave, the nostrils are dilated, the face
pinched, the body trembles violently and shows a disposition to lie
down, and very soon, if not already present, the characteristic symptoms
appear. These are, _tremors_ and _violent spasmodic twitchings_ of the
_large muscles of the back_, _loins_ and _hips_, ending in contractions,
with more or less loss of motive power. The body trembles violently, the
limbs become weak so that they sway and bend, the animal walks
crouchingly behind, and soon goes down unable to support himself, the
urine discharged is high-colored, thick, and has a strong ammoniacal
odor; the pulse varies from 60 to 80 beats per minute, generally weak
though sometimes strong; temperature from 102 to 104.5 Fahrenheit, or
even higher. The bowels may be regular, and in mild attacks the appetite
is not impaired.

In severe cases the animal lies prostrate, plainly unable to rise,
refuses to eat or drink, struggles violently in his attempts to raise
himself, and coma (insensibility) may supervene; in such cases the
conjunctive mucous membrane of the eyes is much congested.

In _very_ violent cases the animal is suddenly struck down, struggles
violently for a few hours, becomes comatose and dies.

In milder cases the severe symptoms abate, but the animal does not
regain the use of its limbs, and though it may eat and remain perfectly
conscious, is unable to rise and ultimately dies from some complication.

In favorable cases the trembling, twitches and spasms abate, the urine
becomes more natural, the power of movement returns, and in a few days
the animal is convalescent, often having for some time a swelling across
the breast like a pad as a result of the dropsical infiltration of this
depending tissue.

In other cases, the loss of power in certain muscles remains for a long
time, and yet in other cases cerebral complications and death may ensue
as a result of defective urinary secretion.

TREATMENT.—Is much more favorable under our method than by the usual
course. Give at first A.A., a dose every hour for six or eight hours to
relieve the vascular excitement and increase the action of the liver and
kidneys, then give the J.K., in alternation with A.A., at intervals of
two hours between doses. Continue these two Remedies for say twenty-four
hours, or even longer, and when the animal is easier, and more
especially if the urine has _not yet become more free and natural_,
interpose H.H., in alternation with J.K., at intervals of three or four
hours between doses.

Later on and for remaining complications, if such exist, give J.K., and
H.H., two doses of each per day in alternation.


                            Anthrax—Charbon

This is an epizootic disease with quite an ancient history, mostly
prevalent in the deltas, low grounds and river bottoms of our far
Southern States. At times it prevails over certain sections, carrying
off hundreds and even thousands of horses and mules, while other seasons
are measurably free from its ravages.

It is caused by a germ which enters the body through the mouth on food
or water or through a cut in the skin. The anthrax germ is very
difficult to destroy and a stable or pasture once infected will remain
so for many years.

SYMPTOMS.—Usually for some hours before the disease is manifested
externally, the affected animal will appear languid, the ears droop and
signs of general depression may be noticed, followed by vertigo and
colic, slight swellings soon make their appearance. These swellings are
at first about the size of a walnut, or the end of one’s finger or
thumb, are round or slightly irregular in shape, but are always adherent
to a pedicle at the base. They are painful and the parts around them are
sensitive; when touched with the finger, a local shivering, like a
sub-cutaneous beating is distinctly felt. They are variously located,
but nearly always upon dependent parts, as under the neck and breast,
between the front and hind legs, along the lower part of the chest and
belly, and on the sheath and teats. The sheath in some animals is so
enormously swelled as to interfere with urination. The swellings are
rarely seen upon the back. Nearly all animals not treated, die in from
twelve to thirty-six hours after the first symptoms are noted, the
temperature rising to 105 before death.

TREATMENT.—This disease is recognized as being incurable, and generally
fatal. In suspected cases, give A.A., every two hours, until the animal
improves or the disease becomes thoroughly developed, in which latter
case the animal should be killed at once.

The carcass of the animal and everything connected with it should be
burned, and the entire premises thoroughly disinfected as given under
contagious abortion, page 122.

                  *       *       *       *       *


                        For Every Living Animal

In addition to the chapters on the Diseases of Horses, Sheep, Cattle,
Dogs, Hogs and Poultry, HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY REMEDIES are used for
every living animal.

We have constant orders from Atlantic City from the owner of the
Performing Seals.

From Arkansas the owner of an Alligator Farm is a persistent user.

Harper Brothers published a book on Canary Birds, and the author refers
to the use of our REMEDIES, all through the book.

When the Belgian Hares were imported into this country, the Agricultural
papers were full of the accounts of the use of HUMPHREYS’ REMEDIES.

There is hardly a lover of Cats in the United States who does not use
our REMEDIES.

The dose can be graduated from five to fifteen drops, according to the
size of the animal.




                                PART II
                           Diseases of Cattle




                               CHAPTER I
                            GENERAL DISEASES


                               Black Leg

Black Leg affects cattle when from three months to two years old,
younger or older than this they rarely have it. It comes from a well
known germ, the Bacillus Chanvoei, which enters the system through a cut
or scratch, such as produced by thorns, barbed wire, etc. The disease
cannot be transmitted to man.

SYMPTOMS.—The chief characteristic of this disease is the swellings
which may appear on any part of the body, except the tail or below the
knee or hock. The thigh and shoulder are most commonly attacked. The
swellings rapidly increase in number and may run together. They give a
crackling sensation on pressure and are cool and without tenderness in
the center. If opened in the center there is no pain and a frothy fluid
comes out.

There are also general symptoms as follows: the animal does not eat or
chew the cud, loss of strength and general depression, high fever,
lameness, stiffness and often dragging of one leg on account of the
swellings. These symptoms increase as the disease progresses, the
breathing becomes faster, the animal groans and may have attacks of
colic. The animal almost always dies in from one and one-half to three
days.

TREATMENT.—The disease is incurable, and diseased animals should be
killed at once, the bodies burned and the premises disinfected as given
under Abortion, page 122. The healthy animals should be moved to another
pasture and the infected pasture burned off the following winter, this
destroys the germs in that pasture.

Cattle may be rendered immune to Black Leg by vaccination. The vaccine
with directions for its use is given away to stock owners by the Chief
of the Bureau of Animal Industry, U. S. Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D. C.


                Foot and Mouth Disease—Eczema Epizootica

DEFINITION.—An acute, contagious fever, characterized by the formation
of vesicles and ulcers, chiefly about the mouth and hoofs, etc. The
eruptions appear on the mucous membrane of the mouth, on the fetlock,
and in the cleft of the hoofs, and not unfrequently as a eruption on the
udder. The disorder chiefly prevails among cattle and sheep, but under
favoring circumstances, also attacks other domestic quadrupeds, and even
man.

CAUSES.—It appears as an epidemic, and spreads exclusively by contagion.
The precise nature of the germ is unknown, but it is chiefly limited to
the contents of the vesicles, the secretion of the ulcers, the saliva,
the blood and the natural secretions and excretions, of the diseased
animal; and these convey the disease. The predisposing causes are
exposure to cold, wet, currents of cold air, poor fodder, want of
cleanliness and good housing; and anything that tends to lower the
constitutional vitality. The activity of the virus is preserved for many
months. The poison may be conveyed by the clothes of herdsmen and other
persons, by manure, tools, fodder, by grass and ground previously
trodden by diseased animals, and milk to sucking calves, indeed by
almost anything. It finds its way into the system in various ways, not
depending on any wound for admission. The communication to man is by
drinking the milk of diseased cows. A second attack is rare.

SYMPTOMS.—After a period of incubation, lasting from three to six days,
the animal is seized with a shivering fit, and appears dull and
stupified. A vesicular eruption soon appears on the mouth, the hoofs,
and the teats. Sucking calves have a similar eruption on the fauces and
pharynx, with irritation of the whole alimentary canal, attended with
inability to suck, and exhausting diarrhea. The eyes are then observed
to be dim, watery, congested; the muzzle, ears and horns alternately hot
and cold; shivering ensues; rumination is diminished; the milk is less
in quantity, yellower and thicker than usual, and much deteriorated in
quality; the bag swollen, tender, hot; the back arched; the coat staring
and harsh; the pulse somewhat accelerated; the temperature moderately
elevated, reaching 102°, or even 104°; the eruption in the month is
first seen on the inner surface of the upper lip, the edge of the upper
jaw where there are no teeth, on the tip and edges of the tongue, and is
indicated by salivation, by pain and loss of power in taking and eating
food. The vesicles occur on the mucous membrane, singly or in patches,
first as little red spots, then as whitish-yellow, slightly turbid
blisters, about the size of a bean, at first transparent, but
subsequently filled with a puriform fluid. These vesicles burst in about
eighteen hours, discharge their fluid, leaving behind shallow ulcers,
which often run together and then form deep and ragged ulcers. The lips,
cheeks, tongue, and sometimes the Schneiderian membrane, are affected.
The eruption on the feet is first seen around the coronet and in the
interdigital space, especially of the hind legs; and the resulting
vesicles burst quickly, because of the animal’s movements. The animal
evidently suffers intense pain, is lame or unable to stand, and moves
reluctantly or cautiously; the hoofs swell; the vascular secreting
membranes become inflamed; the hoofs are cast; the bones may become
diseased; and serious mischief may ensue. The eruption on the udder
turns to vesicles, as in the mouth, and, when the fluid dries or
escapes, thin scales are formed. The teats are swollen and sore. In
exceptional cases, a vesicular eruption appears on the muzzle, the
mucous membrane of the nostrils, the conjunctivae of the eyes, and the
mucous membrane of the vagina.

In favorable cases, the fever subsides about the fourth day, the
eruption declines, the appetite returns, and in seven to fourteen days
the animal recovers. But complications are not uncommon. And in
unfavorable cases the fever is high, the ulceration increases, the
animal suffers from exhaustion, wasting, discharge of stringy, bloody
mucous from the mouth, and of offensive matter from the nostrils; the
face is swollen, the breath foul, the respiration rapid and grunting;
the pulse small, weak, rapid; the blood becomes impure; the belly and
legs œdematous; the hoofs slough off; diarrhea supervenes, and death
follows about the ninth or tenth day. An aggravation may occur in milch
cows by the bursting of the vesicles when the teat is grasped in
milking, for the fluid escapes, the sore bleeds and ulcer spreads; and
though the sore be scabbed over between the milking times, the scab is
then again pulled off. The consequence is that the cow, feeling intense
pain and irritation, kicks, resents the milking, holds back the milk,
and thus prevents the “stripping” of the udder. The effect of this may
be an attack of inflammation of the udder, which may prove fatal, or may
be followed by induration and atrophy of the udder. Or abscesses may
form in the udder, and sometimes large portions of it slough away,
rendering the cow comparatively useless for milking purposes. Abortion
is not uncommon.

This disease may be easily mistaken for Stomatitis, cow pox or fowl of
the foot. However in Stomatitis there is no eruption on the foot; and in
cow pox and fowl of the foot there is no eruption on the muzzle.

PROGNOSIS.—This is unfavorable—The United States Government and the
Health Officers of the several States require all suspected cases of
Foot and Mouth Disease to be quarantined, and upon the full development
of the disease all animals infected, to be killed. Human beings are
liable to become infected, great care should be exercised in handling
diseased animals or their carcases.


                               Rheumatism

This disease is almost invariably the consequence of cold and wet, or
chill after over-exertion. The symptoms are as follows:

Dullness; loss of spirits; disinclination to move, and painful stiffness
of the back or joints when moving; loss of appetite; pain in the back,
manifested by the animal flinching when pressed upon; the joints, one or
more, become affected, and the animal prefers to lie down, and cannot
move without great pain and difficulty; the joints, or one or more of
them, become swelled, and are also exceedingly hot and tender to the
touch. In some cases, there is considerable heat and fever, in others,
it is but slight. The complaint is quite liable to return from exposure,
changes of weather, or even the wind blowing from a different quarter.
The disease not unfrequently changes from one joint or limb to another.

TREATMENT.—The B.B., is for all the usual forms of this disease, giving
twenty drops, three or four times per day, in severe cases, and morning
and night in the mild ones.

When the disease is ushered in or attended with considerable heat and
fever, either during its continuance, or from the first, the A.A., in
doses of twenty drops, should be alternated with the B.B., at the
intervals mentioned above.


                                Lumbago

This is merely a form of rheumatism, locating itself upon the muscles of
the loins. It may be mistaken for some other or different disease, and
hence its symptoms should be known.

SYMPTOMS.—After some exposure, especially to cold or wet, or a draft of
air, the cow will suddenly become lame in one leg, without other signs
to explain the nature of the attack. Another leg may then be affected,
while the first one seems better or quite well. Some pain and heat may
be discovered in one of the joints; and then the muscles of the back
show more clearly the location of the disease; or from the first the
disease may be referable to this point; the animal yields and flinches
when they are pressed upon, in consequence of the pain; the beast is not
able to walk, or does so very stiffly and awkwardly, in consequence of
increased pain from movement. These attacks may continue for a time,
disappear and return again, in consequence of new exposure.

TREATMENT.—The B.B. should be given, a dose of twenty drops, three times
per day, which follow with J.K.


                  Ophthalmia, Inflammation of the Eye

Diseased and inflamed eyes in cattle may sometimes occur as a result of
congestion, or from inflammation or a cold, but in general from an
injury, the result of a blow of a whip, or stick, or from dirt or hay
seed, or some similar substance irritating the eye.

SYMPTOMS.—The eyelids are swelled and closed; tears flow in abundance;
the eye shrinks from the light when the lids are opened; the white of
the eye or conjunctiva is reddish or covered with red veins; the haw is
also red and swollen; the eye itself is clouded and covered with a film.

TREATMENT.—Examine the eye for dirt, hay seed, or other substances, and
when found remove them. Bathe the eye with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH
HAZEL, diluted half and half with soft water, morning and night, until
the more violent symptoms are removed. Give, internally, fifteen drops
of A.A. each morning and night.

In long standing cases, a dose of I.I., repeated every few nights, will
be found of great value, while the A.A. is given each morning.


                      Fits, Convulsions, Epilepsy

The symptoms of fits are pretty well known. Without any or very trifling
warning, the beast staggers and falls suddenly to the ground; he often
bellows in the most alarming manner; then every part of the body is
violently convulsed; the tail is lashed; the teeth are ground; the mouth
closed, and jaws fastened together; the breathing is quick and attended
with heaving at the flanks; frothy saliva dribbles from the mouth, and
the urine and dung are discharged involuntarily. In a few moments the
convulsions become less severe, then cease, and the animal soon seems as
well as if nothing had happened.

Fits are most apt to attack young, vigorous, well fed cattle, or those
that have been much exposed to the direct action of the sun.

TREATMENT.—Little or nothing can be done during an attack; but as one is
likely to be followed by another, the medicine should be given as soon
as the attack is well over.

Give, immediately after the attack, twenty drops of the A.A., and repeat
the remedy morning and night for some days.

If an animal is subject to these fits (epilepsy), returning at intervals
of a few days or weeks, give, alternately, at intervals of six or eight
days, twenty drops of A.A., and J.K., and continue these for some time.


                       Foul in the Foot, Foot-rot

Usually comes from standing on a filthy floor, but may follow an injury
or tuberculosis.

There is lameness and swelling of the pasterns, and heat, with evident
pain; matter then forms, and unless it is let out, it will extend in all
directions under the foot, and appear at the coronet or top of the hoof;
and from this long, narrow ulcers remain, and proud flesh springs up
from the diseased places.

TREATMENT.—Place animal in stall with clean dry bedding. Examine the
foot carefully, and remove all foreign substances, dirt, etc., that may
be found; then foment the foot with hot water, night and morning, and
apply the VETERINARY OIL, and wrap it up with a cloth to keep it clean;
the hoof should be pared, and those parts of it cut away that may
interfere with the escape of matter; all dead hoof must be removed. The
sore must be examined, and if dark and unhealthy, the OIL and covering
must be renewed from time to time until the dark matter sloughs off.
After the ulcer looks clean, simply apply the VETERINARY OIL, over which
a cloth must be kept wrapped around to prevent dirt lodging in the wound
and causing fresh irritation. These may be renewed, if needful, until
entire recovery.

Give also the I.I., each night, a dose of twenty drops.


                                 Mange

MANGE is a disease caused by parasites which live on the skin of the
animal. These parasites are of three kinds: 1. Burrowing mites or
Sarcoptes. 2. Sucking mites or Dermatodectes. 3. Scale eating mites or
Symbiotes. The first class can be seen only with a magnifying glass but
the last two can be seen with the naked eye.

SARCOPTIC MANGE is very rare in cattle; the dermatodectic and symbiotic
are the usual forms.

SYMPTOMS.—Great itching; so that the animal is continually rubbing
itself, the hair falls off, scabs or sores remain in patches
particularly at the sides and hollow of the neck and the root of the
tail.

TREATMENT.—Clip the hair around the sore places and soften scabs by
applying oil or glycerine containing 5% of creolin or lysol. Then apply
a thick lather of green soap and leave on over night. These applications
are to soften and remove the scabs and prepare the skin for the real
remedy. Of these there are many; sulphur ointment (equal parts flowers
of sulphur and lard) is an old standby or you can use a 3% solution of
creolin or lysol. This should be thoroughly rubbed into the skin by a
brush and kept on for a week reapplying as it becomes rubbed off. Then
wash off and reapply for another week. The reason for the second
application is that while the first will kill off all the animals, there
may be some eggs that are not killed and if only one application is made
after it has been removed, the eggs may hatch out and the Mange come
back.


                               Hidebound

This condition, in which the skin seems firm, hard and bound to the
parts beneath, is due to some morbid condition of the system rather than
to a disease of the skin itself. There is most frequently some
derangement of the stomach, or some old standing organic disease. Remove
these, and the disease disappears, and the hide becomes soft and loose.

TREATMENT.—Giving twenty drops of J.K., morning and night, will
generally remove the difficulty.

If it fails after a fair trial, give the J.K., each night, and twenty
drops of I.I., each morning.


                                Anthrax

ANTHRAX is a very contagious disease from which comes a well known germ,
the bacillus anthracis, and which attacks almost all animals and man.
The germ lives in the animal’s body and also in rich moist soils, and is
very difficult to eradicate. The germ enters the body by the mouth, in
food or water, or through cuts in the skin.

SYMPTOMS.—There is sudden high fever (105 to 107) the pulse is very
frequent (80 to a 100 or more) small and scarcely perceptible. The
mucous membrane of the head becomes very red, the eyes red, swollen and
filled with tears. The temperature of the body is unequally distributed,
some parts hot, others cold. The animal does not eat or chew the cud.
There is great depression, weakness, stupor and loss of sensation. There
is trembling over the body, particularly in the hind quarters, which may
even “give way”. Sometimes instead of stupor, there are attacks of fury,
where the animal will bellow and dash itself against any object it may
see.

There may or may not be carbuncles, these are small swellings about the
size of a walnut, which may appear on the head, chest, abdomen, etc.,
they are blue-black or dark red in color and are not usually painful.

One of the most remarkable things about anthrax is its rapid course,
most animals die in from 12 to 48 hours. After death the bodies do not
get stiff and decay very rapidly.

TREATMENT.—This disease is recognized as being incurable, and generally
fatal. In suspected cases, give A.A., every two hours, until the animal
improves, or the disease becomes thoroughly developed in which latter
case the animal should be killed at once, the body burned, and the
premises disinfected as given under contagious abortion, page 122.


                         Big Jaw—Actinomycosis

This disease is caused by the Ray fungus which is sometimes found on
barley, oats, cactus, dried grass, etc., and which enters the body of
the animal through cuts or wounds on the tongue, gums, etc., and
particularly with young animals at teething time.

SYMPTOMS.—These of course vary with the position of the wound, through
which the fungus entered the body. If on the tongue, the tongue becomes
swollen and very painful “wooden tongue.” If around the teeth, the jaw
becomes swollen and finally the growth breaks through the skin or into
the mouth. If through the skin of the head or neck, large nodules
appear, varying in size from a hazel nut to a man’s fist.

TREATMENT.—The most successful treatment is by cutting out the nodules;
this of course should be done by a Veterinary Surgeon.

We advise calling a Veterinary Surgeon and having him perform the
operation as soon as possible, as the disease is usually curable if
properly handled and it cannot be transmitted to man or to the other
animals.


            Texas Fever—Red Water—Black Water—Hemoglobinuria

This disease is an infection of the blood by small animals called
protozoa which are transmitted by the cattle tick. Only cattle get this
disease although other animals may have plenty of ticks.

The cattle tick spends part of its life on the animal and part on the
ground. The females after having become pregnant, while on the cattle,
drop to the ground and lay their eggs; when the eggs hatch, the young
ticks crawl to the top of the blades of grass and attach themselves to
the cattle.

There are two types of this disease, the acute and the chronic, the
acute form usually attacks cattle in hot weather, while the chronic or
mild form is more apt to be found in the fall.

SYMPTOMS.—In the acute form there is fever, great depression, loss of
appetite, and the animal does not chew the cud. The animal lies down or
stands with arched back. The most characteristic symptom is the color of
the urine; this ranges from pink to black. Death takes place in from
three to four days, generally preceded by a fall of temperature, or the
fever may drop and the animal recover very slowly. In the chronic or
mild type, there is fever, loss of appetite, the animal does not chew
the cud and may become very thin; but usually the urine is not
discolored. In this type of the disease the animals usually recover.

You should be careful not to mistake Texas Fever for Anthrax or Black
Leg. In Texas Fever the ticks are always found on the hide, and calves
do not have it while all animals have Anthrax. The membranes are pale in
Texas Fever, but very red in Anthrax. In Black Leg the animals are from
six months to two years old, older or younger they do not have it; and
of course there are the characteristic swellings.

TREATMENT.—Prevention is usually more satisfactory than treatment after
the disease has started. However as the disease is not transmitted to
the other animals or to man, there is no reason for not trying to save
the animal. Give A.A., twenty drops four times a day for two days, then
alternate H.H., with the A.A. Remove all ticks and place in a tick free
enclosure and give nourishing diet.

PREVENTION.—For small numbers of animals in infested districts.

Pick or brush the ticks from the animals three times per week
particularly from belly, legs, tail and udder from June 1st to November
1st.

Or smear the legs and sides of the cattle twice a week with Beaumont
crude petroleum, or a mixture of 1 gallon each of cottonseed and
kerosene oil (coal oil) containing 1 pound of sulphur, these may be
either brushed or sprayed on from June 1st to November 1st.

For large numbers of animals write to the Bureau of Animal Industry, U.
S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C., and ask for Farmers
Bulletin No. 152.

To remove ticks from an infested pasture.

1. Remove all animals on September 1st and allow no animals on the
pasture until April 1st, or cultivate the pasture for a year, or burn it
over in spring and fall, and allow no animals with ticks on it.


                          Government Approvals

                  *       *       *       *       *

Approval of DR. HUMPHREYS’ PREPARATIONS has been bestowed by the Medical
Authorities of different American Republics. Their introduction into
France has been allowed by the French Government. They have been
approved by the National Board of Health of the Argentine Republic and
by the National Board of Health of the United States of Brazil.

Many complete outfits of HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY REMEDIES have been
furnished to the United States Geological Survey, Department of the
Interior.

HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY REMEDIES are constantly being supplied to the U.
S. Naval Magazines, Iona Island, New York.

                     Humphreys’ Homeo. Medicine Co.

               Cor. William and Ann Streets      NEW YORK




                          CHAPTER II.—PART II.
                 DISEASES OF THE ORGANS OF RESPIRATION


                      Choryza, or Cold in the Head

This very common affection consists of an irritation, and sometimes
inflammation of the lining membrane of the nose. It is usually caused by
exposure to cold or wet, or too sudden changes of weather; it is
sometimes the commencement of catarrh, and is most frequent during
winter and early spring; or it may arise from the irritation of dust
inhaled during a long journey.

SYMPTOMS.—In some cases of cold, the irritation is confined to the nose
alone, and is then known as Choryza. It is manifested by a discharge
from the nose, first thin and watery, afterward becoming thicker, like
matter, and corrosive, fretting the skin.

If the disease extends along the air passages, bronchitis, or even
inflammation of the lungs, results, manifested by the cough, fever and
difficulty of breathing peculiar to these affections.

TREATMENT.—For mere choryza or cold in the head, give twenty drops of
C.C., morning and night.

If symptoms of Fever, Bronchitis, or Pneumonia should be present,
interpose a few doses of A.A., twenty drops, repeated every three or
four hours, which will promptly relieve. Consult also what is said on
Bronchitis or Pneumonia.


                     Hoose, Catarrh, or Common Cold

Differs from the Choryza, as the irritation involves the lining membrane
of the entire air passages. It is most frequent in the changeable
weather of spring and fall, when cattle are exposed to frequent
alternations of temperature, or when too many cows are crowded together
in a stable, rendering the air hot and impure. Young beasts and cows
after calving are especially subject to hoose.

SYMPTOMS.—Dry nose, frequent cough, discharge from the nostrils,
stiffness of the limbs, disinclination to move, purging, cold skin, and
then hot; imperfect chewing of the cud, failing of milk, watery eyes,
quick pulse and breathing. It is very frequent and very fatal in calves,
and requires to be attended to promptly in all cases, or it will end in
some more dangerous disease.

TREATMENT.—During the earlier stage, with fever, heat, quick pulse and
breathing, give the A.A., a dose of twenty drops, four times per day.

Should cough and irritation remain, or not yield promptly to the A.A.,
give the E.E., the same dose, repeated four times daily; or if fever yet
continues, give the two Remedies in alternation, at intervals of three
hours.

For calves, give one-third or half as much as for grown cattle,
according to age or size.


                       Sore Throat or Pharyngitis

The disease consists of inflammation, with consequent swelling and
soreness of the top of the gullet or passage between the mouth and
stomach. It arises from the same causes which produce colds, and
sometimes assumes an epidemic and very fatal character, especially when
the spring or fall is very cold and wet and the animals graze on damp,
marshy grounds. It is usually accompanied with catarrh.

SYMPTOMS.—Difficulty of swallowing, so that solid food is partially
chewed and then dropped from the mouth; fluids are gulped down, or
partly return through the nostrils; or all food may be refused in
consequence of the severe pain attending swallowing; the cud is not
chewed; the throat and glands of the neck are swelled, hot and painful;
the cough is frequent, hoarse, and indicates pain; the breathing becomes
very difficult and labored, and the pulse full and quick.

TREATMENT.—Give twenty drops of A.A., every three or four hours, until
three doses have been given, then begin with the C.C., and give every
three hours of the C.C., in alternation with the A.A. As the animal
improves and the fever and heat abate, the A.A., may be discontinued,
and the C.C., be used alone, at intervals of four or six hours.

In all febrile diseases of cattle, it is of the utmost importance to
house them in a _warm_, _dry_, _comfortable stable_, free from exposure,
dampness, or cold drafts of air, especially in cold or moist weather.


                                 Cough

Cough in the cow is rarely or never a disease of itself, but merely a
symptom or attendant of some disease of the respiratory organs, such as
Catarrh, Bronchitis, Pleurisy or Pneumonia, of which it is merely the
indication. Its symptomatic importance is such that it always deserves
attention, and its cause should at once be carefully investigated. In
some case very grave alterations may be going on in the lungs, which
will escape notice if attention be not directed to it by means of the
cough. Examine the animal carefully, ascertain the state of her pulse,
breathing, appetite, secretion of milk, etc., and direct treatment for
such disease as is found to be present.

However, in the absence of any special indications, the E.E., should be
given, a dose of twenty drops morning and night, which will generally
relieve, and will not be out of place in any case.


           Bronchitis, or Inflammation of the Bronchial Tubes

This disease is usually the result of exposure to cold and wet, or
sudden changes of temperature; it is almost always preceded by a common
cold, which has been neglected or overlooked.

SYMPTOMS.—Cough, which becomes by degrees more painful, frequent and
husky; the countenance becomes anxious and distressed; the breathing is
quick, heaving and obstructed, in consequence of tough, tenacious
phlegm; unwillingness to move; the breath is hot; the cough is increased
by moving about, occurs in fits, and is wheezing in character; no food
is eaten; the animal wastes; skin becomes dry, and is bound to the ribs;
the coat stares and looks unthrifty. The animal may die from extension
of the disease to the substance of the lungs.

TREATMENT.—The earlier stages of this disease, or catarrh, should be
treated at once, as directed under that head. Then a dose or two of the
remedy for that disease removes all danger.

Remove the animal to a warm but well ventilated stable, and feed on warm
mashes and gruel.

Give first, at intervals of two hours, two or three doses of A.A.,
twenty drops at a dose. This will allay the heat and fever to some
extent. Then alternate, at intervals of three hours, the E.E., with the
A.A., the same doses, and continue this treatment until restored, only
that the medicine need not be given so frequently after improvement has
progressed.


                                Pleurisy

This disease consists of an inflammation of the delicate membrane which
lines the chest, and also is reflected over or covers the lungs.

It is caused most frequently by exposure to cold, or from the extension
of catarrh. Pleurisy rarely exists alone, but is almost invariably
complicated with bronchitis or pneumonia, or both.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease generally begins in the same manner as pneumonia,
with dullness, loss of appetite, etc. The cough is attended with pain,
and seems to be cut short, as if the animal tried to stop it; the
breathing is short, seemingly cut off and evidently painful during the
passage of the air into the lungs, and is attended with a grunt during
its expiration; the sides are painful when pressed upon; the skin, at
the angles of the mouth, is wrinkled; the shoulders and upper part of
the chest are in a constant quiver; the head is stretched out; the eyes
are unusually bright; the tongue hangs out of the mouth, from which
frothy slaver is continually flowing. The animal neither eats nor chews
the cud; she gets weaker and thinner every day, and all the symptoms
become more and more severe until death ensues, often preceded by
excessive purging.

TREATMENT.—Give at first the A.A., a dose of twenty drops, every two
hours, and continue this the first day and night if the case is severe.

Then alternate the E.E., with the A.A., at intervals of two, three or
four hours.

FOOD AND STABLING.—In all serious diseases of the air-passages,
Bronchitis, Pleurisy, Pneumonia, etc., the animal should be placed in a
dry, comfortable stable, not too close, and her food should consist of
bran mashes, boiled carrots or turnips, meal-gruel and hay tea. Good old
hay may be given _sparingly_; straw and chaff not at all. When the
appetite is returning, great care must be taken not to give too much
food at once, for if the stomach is overloaded or crammed, disease is
almost sure to return, and the animal to die in consequence. _Give but
very sparingly of food_ until the stomach has fully regained its former
power of digestion.


                Pneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs

This is an inflammation of the substance of the lungs, or lights, and is
rarely unaccompanied with pleurisy or bronchitis. It is usually brought
on by exposure to cold or sudden changes of temperature, or from the
extension of a common cold.

THE SYMPTOMS are as follows: The cow becomes dull, disinclined to move,
and hangs her head; the muzzle is dry; the mouth hot; the cough frequent
and dry; the coat rough and staring; the horns, ears and feet are hot at
one time and cold at another; the breathing is quickened and attended
with heaving of the flanks; the pulse is full and quick; appetite is
gone and chewing of the cud suspended. The thirst is great, bowels bound
and dung dark-colored; the spine is tender when pressed upon; the head
projected forward and eyes staring; tears flow down the face; the teeth
are ground; a discharge flows from the nose, at first clear and watery,
afterwards red and containing some blood; the breathing becomes quicker,
more difficult, and labored as the disease advances; the cough comes on
in fits; the nostrils are widened, and play to their utmost limit; the
body is covered with sweat; the pulse becomes weaker and increased in
frequency, and these symptoms increase in violence and become gradually
worse until the animal dies.

TREATMENT.—Give, the first twelve or twenty-four hours, the A.A., a dose
of twenty drops, every two hours.

After the fever and heat have been thus in a measure subdued, alternate
the E.E. with the A.A., at intervals of three hours, giving as before,
twenty drops at a dose.

Continue this treatment steadily, except that, unless the case is very
critical and urgent, the medicine need not to be kept up during the
night, but a dose of the E.E. may be given, late in the night, and be
permitted to act undisturbed until the morning; then go on as before.

For food and stabling, consult the article on Pleurisy, page 149.


                         Bronchitis from Worms

CAUSES.—Calves and yearlings are particularly liable to the production
of parasite worms, of the genus _Filaria_, in the bronchial tubes, which
are sometimes choked up with them. They are from one to three inches
long, of a silvery color, and generally invade cattle fed in low, marshy
or woody pasture, where there is little water.

SYMPTOMS.—Slight catarrh; cough, at first dry and husky, then short and
paroxysmal; accelerated breathing, with occasional grunting, and
distress in the chest; quick pulse (100); thin nasal discharge;
dullness; wasting. If these be not relieved, the animal becomes
restless, manifests anxiety, breathes with rapidity, difficulty and
grunting; the ears hang, the nostrils widen, the eyes are hollow;
dyspnœa, debility, and atrophy end in death. Sometimes there is
tolerable health, while the flesh all wastes away, and nothing is left
but skin and bones. A _post-mortem_ examination shows inflammation and
thickening of the bronchia and lungs, and accumulation of worms, rolled
together with mucous in small balls.

TREATMENT.—Where there is any doubt of the existence of worms, treat as
for bronchitis. If disease is evidently from an accumulation of worms in
the bronchial tubes, the inhalation of chloroform is recommended,
repeated at lengthened intervals, according to the circumstances of the
case.


                        Tuberculosis—Consumption

DEFINITION.—This is a serious and almost always a chronic disease,
characterized by the formation of tubercles in the lungs, glands,
intestines, udder, etc., which, increasing in size and running together,
at length suppurate, and form abscesses in the substance of those
organs.

CAUSES.—Tuberculosis is caused by the Bacillus Tuberculosis which is
transmitted to a healthy animal by water, fodder, dust, etc., which has
come in contact with the nasal or uterine discharges of a diseased
animal. However bad ventilation and poor nourished predispose to the
disease.

SYMPTOMS.—Inward, feeble, painful, hoarse, gurgling cough, especially
after exertion; loss of appetite; irregularity of rumination;
disturbance of digestion; emaciation; loss of hair, especially of the
eye-brows; unthrifty appearance.

TREATMENT.—This disease is recognized as being incurable, and generally
fatal. In suspected cases, give A. A., and E.E., every two hours, until
the animal improves or the disease becomes thoroughly developed, in
which latter case the animal should be killed at once.

ACCESSORY TREATMENT.—The animal should be housed in a stable that is
comfortable and airy, but free from north and east winds, and kept apart
from other cattle; it should never be hurried, excited or alarmed; the
litter should be frequently changed and kept dry, and the skin
frequently rubbed and curry-combed to stimulate its perspiratory action.


                               PALO ALTO

                  *       *       *       *       *

HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY SALESMAN crossed the continent to visit Palo Alto,
the stock farm of

                           GOVERNOR STANFORD

                              THE HOME OF

                      SUNOL, ARION, PALO ALTO, &c.

After presenting proper credentials and exhibiting the list of prominent
stock owners using the Remedies, Mr. Reynolds, the superintendent, and
Mr. Marvin, the trainer, consented to his treating SUNOL (later owned by
Robert Bonner, Esq.,) and PALO ALTO for lameness.

After thoroughly testing the Remedies on these and other cases, Mr.
Stanford’s Business Manager and Attorney, Mr. Lathrop, placed an order
for HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY REMEDIES, probably the largest ever given for
Veterinary Medicines alone.




                         CHAPTER III.—PART II.
                  DISEASES OF THE ORGANS OF DIGESTION


                               Rumination

Oxen and sheep belong to the class of animals known as Ruminants, which
feed principally on the leaves and stalks of plants. The quantity of
food which they take at a time is very considerable; with a powerful
prehensile tongue, they rapidly gather up into their mouths thick and
long tufts of grass, which are only slightly masticated, and immediately
swallowed. Four stomachs—so called, although the fourth stomach is the
true stomach, and the other three are appendages of the œsophagus—are
employed in the process of digestion. The first—the paunch, or rumen—is
by far the larger of the four, occupying three-fourths of the abdominal
cavity. Its mucous membrane is rough with _papillæ_ or eminences, and
protected with a dense scaly _epithelium_. The second is called the
recticulum, or honey-comb bag, because the lining mucous membrane is so
disposed in folds as to form hexagonal spaces; within these spaces the
tubes of the glands may be seen. This bag is the smallest of the
digestive organs, is connected with the anterior part of the paunch,
with which it communicates freely, and to which, indeed, it may be
regarded as dependent. The third cavity is the _manyplies_, _maniplus_
or _omasum_; the first name being given on account of the many plies or
folds formed by the mucous membrane. These folds are of unequal breadth,
the principal ones being separated by others, which gradually diminish
in size. The surface is covered with _papillæ_, the folds being
flattened at the sides and somewhat pointed at the fore edges, forming
ridges and furrows. The contents of the manyplies are always dry; the
food sometimes becomes compressed into thin cakes between the folds, and
the epithelium manifests a tendency to peel off in shreds and adhere to
the pulpy mass of food. The fourth cavity—the _abomasum_ or _rennet_—is
the true stomach, discharging the same functions as the stomachs of
those animals that have only one such organ. It is considerably larger
than either the second or third stomach, although less than the first;
is lined with a thick villous coat, which is contracted into ridges and
furrows, somewhat like the omasum, and secretes an acid, solvent juice,
essential to the process of chymification. The act of rumination calls
into exercise the first three organs. The crushed food passes from the
œsophagus to the rumen; there it remains for some time, subject to the
action of heat, saliva, mucous and the secretion of the organ. The
tougher the food the longer it is retained. From the rumen the food
passes to the recticulum, where the operation of maceration, commenced
in the first stomach, is continued, the operation being facilitated by a
slow, churning movement characteristic of both organs. The recticulum
also appears to be the special receptacle of the fluid that is
swallowed, for this at once passes into it, without going into the first
stomach. The precise nature of the action of the secretions is
uncertain. It is supposed to be a fermentation; no doubt at all times a
certain proportion of gas is evolved from the food, but excessive
fermentation is indicative of disease (Hoove), and of rapid and
dangerous chemical change in the contents of the rumen. The pulpy mass,
to which the food has been reduced by the chemical change and churning
movement of the first two digestive cavities, is now prepared for
thorough mastication by the teeth, and for ultimate solution by the
digestive fluids. This mastication is _rumination_, or “chewing the
cud.” The return of the food to the mouth for this operation is effected
by the churning movement and by the contraction of the diaphragm and
abdominal muscles, which press upward against the rumen and recticulum.
The act of regurgitation is very evident to an observer, who sees a
large mass ascend from the paunch and distend the œsophagus with an
eructating noise. At the moment that a mass of the food passes into the
mouth, the accompanying liquid is swallowed into the first of the three
stomachs, leaving the solid portion to be slowly ground by the teeth.
The length of time thus taken varies with the toughness of the food.
Young and very old animals take longer to chew the cud than healthy
adults. When the food has been sufficiently comminuted it is again
swallowed, some of it into the first two stomachs; but, by a peculiar
mechanism of muscular contraction; the passage into the first is so
closed that the greater portion of it passes through the opening into
the third stomach, from which it goes into the abomasum. The function of
the omasum appears to be to regulate the descent of food into the
abomasum, though some means of assimilation may take place between its
many plies. The last stomach, as already stated, completes the process
of digestion.


                            Loss of the Cud

This is a mere symptom which accompanies many diseases, and even morbid
conditions, which scarcely deserve the name of disease, and will yield
with the removal of the ailment of which it is a mere symptom. Sometimes
it may be present when nothing else is sufficiently tangible to warrant
treatment, or it may continue after the disease otherwise seems to have
been removed.

TREATMENT.—In any case in which it appears to exist independently, or to
be the principal symptom, give twenty drops of the J. K., morning and
night, The “cud” will soon return.


                                 Colic

This disease is not so dangerous as tympanitis, yet it may prove fatal
from bad treatment or neglect. It is generally the result of improper or
indigestible food, or food in too great quantity, or that to which the
animal is not accustomed. If colic comes on after indigestible food, it
is accompanied by constipation and thirst. Certain kinds of food, such
as grains, oats, decayed turnips or cabbages, or dry food, are liable to
induce it, or it may arise from exposure to cold when the body is warm,
or from cold drinking when the body is heated.

It consists in severe paroxysms of pain in the bowels, and, if
neglected, is liable to cause inflammatory disease of the digestive
organs.

SYMPTOMS.—Sudden manifestation of pain in the belly, by uneasiness,
pawing the ground, striking the belly with the hind legs or horns, often
lying down and then rising, grinding the teeth, and moaning. When caused
by wind, the belly is much swelled on the left side, and there is
frequent passage of flatus. The animal’s back is arched, and she
frequently looks at her flanks, scrapes with her fore feet, and kicks
with the hind ones. All these symptoms increase, until she expires amid
groans and grinding of the teeth. Or the following may be noticed:

The animal refuses to eat, looks to its sides, paws the ground, kicks
against the body with the hind feet, lies down, rises again, and
continues these movements till unable longer to keep upon its feet.
Often the animal falls down so violently that it seems as though the
four legs were suddenly struck away from under it, or he squats down
like a dog upon his hind quarters, rolls over, lies upon his back for a
time, with the legs stretched upward, and generally acts as if frantic.
The horns, ears and feet are alternately hot and cold. The animal
suffers from thirst and constipation, the longer the constipation the
more acute the pain; the paunch is much swollen. If recovery takes
place, the symptoms are gradually mitigated, and then entirely
disappear. On the other hand, if the pains get worse and become more
frequent, the bowels become inflamed, and if the pains, under these
circumstances, suddenly disappear, the inflammation terminates in
_gangrene_ (mortification), and the animal dies.

TREATMENT.—The F. F., will almost invariably be found successful. Give a
dose of twenty drops every half hour until relieved. If not better after
a few doses, and should there be fever, alternate the A. A., the same
dose, with the F. F., at the same intervals. As the animal seems
relieved, or partially so, give the remedies at longer intervals.


                              Constipation

This is rarely of grave consequence in cattle, and when it exists, is
usually a symptom of some other disease. When present, a dose of twenty
drops of the J. K., given morning and night, will soon set all right
again. If there is suspicion of some inflammatory condition lurking in
the system, the A. A., in like doses, will have the like effect.


 Tympanitis—Hoove—Blown—Drum-Belly—Grain-Sick—Heaving of the Flanks—Maw
                                 Bound

This disorder—of very frequent occurrence among cattle, though not
belonging exclusively to them—is of two kinds; one due to the evolution
of gas from the food taken, the other to the impaction of the food. In
one case the gas produces enormous inflation of the rumen, or first of
the four stomachs possessed by cattle, in the other distension.

DIAGNOSIS.—To Mr. Surmon we are indebted for the following table of

           DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DISTENSION FROM GAS AND FOOD
 ──────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────
        DISTENTION FROM GAS        │  DISTENTION FROM IMPACTED FOOD
 ──────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────
 The left flank, on pressure, feels│The left flank, on pressure, feels
 soft, elastic and yielding to the │solid; does not yield readily to
 fingers. On percussion, sounds    │the fingers. On percussion, or on
 hollow and drum-like.             │being struck, sounds dull.
 Frequent belching; the wind which │No belching or eructation of wind.
 escapes has an offensive smell.   │
 Respiration quick, short and      │Respiration not much interfered
 puffing.                          │with.
 Position standing; head stretched │Position lying down, and is with
 forward, unable to move; moans,   │difficulty induced to move;
 and appears in great distress;    │looking dull and listless.
 eyes red and staring.             │

CAUSES.—When cattle, especially such as have had poor and scanty food,
are turned into a rich pasture, or stray into the fields of lucern,
etc., they will often eat ravenously, and take more than they can
digest. Wet grass in warm weather, or fodder that has become heated in
consequence of being heaped together while damp, may also be too freely
eaten. The consequence is that the rumen is overloaded, and the
contents, under the influence of warmth and moisture, ferment and evolve
what is at first carburetted hydrogen; and subsequently sulphuretted
hydrogen; or, if there be no formation of gas, the food remains solid
and undigested. Drinking excessively of cold water, eating too much
bran, chaff, unboiled potatoes, uncrushed oats, grains, boiled roots or
turnips, may cause the same condition.

SYMPTOMS.—These may appear suddenly, but always soon after the animal
has been feeding, generally on returning from the field; they may,
however, occur in the stable. The animal ceases to eat or ruminate, is
swollen or “blown” over the whole belly, but particularly at the flanks
or left side, where the distended stomach lies. The rumen is enormously
swollen, the pillars of the œsophagus are tightly closed, thus
preventing the escape of gas; and the greater the distention the firmer
is the closure of the œsophagus. The swelling yields when pressed by the
finger, and gives forth a hollow sound, like that from a drum when it is
struck. There are also sour and noisy belchings of wind; the cow does
not move, moans, and is evidently in great distress. The distended rumen
presses on the diaphragm and impedes the action of the heart and lungs,
causing shortness and difficulty of breathing; the nostrils are widely
dilated, and there is a threatening of suffocation. As the disease
advances, the pulse becomes hard, full, and quicker than before; the
eyes are bloodshot, glazed, fixed and prominent; the mouth is hot and
full to dripping of frothy slaver; the tongue hangs out; the veins of
the neck and chest are distended with blood; the poor beast crouches,
with its back bent up; the legs are drawn under the body; the tail is
curved upward; the anus, which is closed, protrudes. The body is now
covered with cold sweat; the animal stands in one place, continually
moans or grunts, trembles, totters, falls, struggles violently, ejects
from mouth and nose sour fluid mixed with solid food, and at length
sinks and dies, either from suffocation or rupture of the stomach.

TREATMENT.—This is the same whether the distention is from gas or
impacted food. F.F. may be given a dose every quarter or half hour. We
give the method of puncturing, which, however, need never be resorted to
if the F.F. be administered.

_Puncturing._—Relief is sometimes very urgently required, and this is
best afforded either by plunging a trocar into the left side, or by
passing a probang down the œsophagus into the paunch. If the trocar is
used, let the canula of the instrument be ten or twelve inches long, so
as to prevent the paunch from slipping away from the canula and causing
delay, and perhaps further danger. _Chloride of Lime_ is valuable after
the animal is somewhat relieved by the use of the trocar; about two
drachms should be mixed with a quart of water. In case of immediate
relief being imperative, and a trocar not being at hand, a long, sharp
pointed pen-knife may be used for puncturing. The place for puncturing
is midway between the hip and ribs, where the distended rumen is
prominent; the direction is inward and downward. The puncture will be
followed by an outrush of gas, fluid, and even portions of food. A
quill, or some other tube, must be ready to be inserted in the hole
immediately after the knife is withdrawn, otherwise the wound will
close. If nothing tubular be at hand, a smooth piece of stick must be
put in, or anything else that will serve the purpose of keeping open the
wound till the gas has escaped. The danger of this operation is not from
the wound itself, but from the escape of the contents of the paunch into
the abdomen, which would cause peritonitis, or from piercing the spleen
or kidney. The operation can only be regarded as a rough one, to be
adopted in case of great emergency.

When distension has ceased and matters have to some extent resumed their
ordinary course, the animal should remain some hours without food or
water. The food afterwards should be sparing and suitable.

J. K., should be administered two or three times daily until the animal
is fully recovered.


                           Diarrhea, Scouring

Diarrhea is more common in old cattle and calves than in those of middle
age, where it is generally of little importance, soon correcting itself,
especially in the spring, when herds are first turned into green fields.
The usual causes are: decayed cabbages, bad grains, or other improper
food, or impure water; sudden change to rich pastures; the use of
purgative medicines; exposure to cold and wet, acrid bile, sudden change
from dry to wet weather, or severe exertion in hot, dry weather.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease comes on slowly, with staring coat, shaking,
arched back, fore legs drawn together, cold legs, ears and horns, weak
pulse, tucked up belly, bowels rather looser than usual, deficient
appetite. The animal becomes thinner, more depressed and dull; little or
no milk is given, and the bowels are purged to an alarming extent. This
purging may stop and then reappear to end fatally, or terminate in
dysentery.

TREATMENT.—We should, of course, give food not so loosening in its
character and the F.F., a dose of twenty drops two or three times per
day, will usually be found quite sufficient. In extreme cases, or in
case of failure with this remedy, the I.I., may be alternated with it,
at the same or even more frequent intervals.


             Diarrhea or Cholera or “Skitt” in Young Calves

Is quite common, and not unfrequently dangerous. In its more dangerous
form it appears the first or second day, and it is then presumably
caused by the feverish or unhealthy condition of the mother’s milk. In
its natural condition, this first milk is laxative and intended to act
as a removal of the first passages in the new born calf.

When the milk is very rich in butter, as in the Jersey cattle, it
becomes excessively laxative, especially during the period of the milk
fever, or the first three days after calving. The passages are noticed
to be very frequent, loose, liquid, or even watery, with weakness and
rapid wasting; the legs and ears become cold, and, in extreme cases,
short breath and panting with the tongue out.

TREATMENT.—The dam should always have a dose of A.A., soon after
calving, and this should be continued, a dose at least three times per
day for four days, or until the usual danger from milk fever is passed.

If, however, the dam has had no treatment, give her a dose alternately
of the A.A., and of the F.F., at intervals of three hours, to change the
feverish or unhealthy nature of the milk, as well as to give the calf
the Remedy through the mother’s milk.

Give also to the calf a dose of five drops of F.F., once in three hours
if the case is urgent, or three times per day if but slight, and
gradually omit as the calf improves. If the F.F., fails, give I.I., a
dose every fifteen minutes or half hour at first until relieved, then
once in three hours.


                        Dysentery—Johnes Disease

This is a disease which has existed on certain farms for years without
either the owners or Veterinarians knowing what it was, and it is only
within the last few years that we have known that it was caused by a
definite disease germ.

SYMPTOMS.—This disease usually attacks whole herds rather than
individual animals. At first there is loss of condition and weight with
rough coat and dry skin, then diarrhea is noticed, the discharges being
brown and like molasses. There is no fever, but the animal has little
appetite and keeps getting thinner and weaker all the time until it
finally dies from exhaustion. The course of the disease is long—from two
months to three years—and is always fatal.

TREATMENT.—In suspected cases give F.F., twenty drops every three hours,
until the animal improves or the disease becomes thoroughly developed in
which latter case the animal should be killed at once, and the place
disinfected as given under abortion on page 122.


                               Stomatitis

This is an inflammation of the mucous membrane of the lips, cheeks and
gums and occasionally also of the palate and tongue. It may occur as one
of the symptoms of a disease of the digestive organs or general disease;
or may be caused by thorns, sharp teeth, rough food, poisonous plants,
mercury, fungi, etc.

SYMPTOMS.—The membrane of the mouth is red and inflamed and the animal
does not eat because of the pain in chewing. In some forms of this
disease there are also swellings and tenderness about the pasterns and
cracks and scars on the udder and teats, which makes the disease look
very much like foot and mouth disease. However in foot and mouth
disease, the whole herd and also hogs and sheep are attacked, while with
stomatitis only a few cattle are affected.

TREATMENT.—Give C.C., in the morning, and I.I., at night, also wash the
mouth with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL and water half and half. Give
plenty of clean pure water, and only soft or liquid food, such as
gruels, mashes, etc.

There is also a form of this disease which attacks calves (calf
diphtheria) usually under six weeks old. The mouth is covered with
yellow-gray patches and there is high fever, swelled glands about the
throat, and great weakness. The treatment is the same as given above,
except that as the disease is contagious, the calf must be separated
from the other animals and everything that it has come in contact with
disinfected.


                      Boulimia—Excessive Appetite

An unusual increase of appetite is a symptom of a morbid state of the
constitution. Though the animal eats largely, greedily, and even shows a
disposition for uncommon food, which he takes gluttonously, he may
become more and more emaciated. Suitable food should be given; at the
same time it should be fresh, and not in excessive quantities, although
there is a desire for it. Fresh, cold water should also be given.


            Impaction of the Omasum Fardel Bound—Dry Murrain

The first three stomachs of ruminants do not secrete fluids and are
dependent for their action on saliva and swallowed liquids. Hence if an
animal has not had sufficient water or a fever has dried up the saliva,
the food may become dry and caked in the folds of the third stomach.

SYMPTOMS.—There is loss of cud and appetite, the right flank is full and
hard on pressure. In slight cases the animal may remain standing, but
usually is lying on the left side with nose against the right flank.
There is constipation alternating with diarrhea. The legs and horns are
cold and the coat “hide bound.” These are the usual symptoms, but
sometimes the animal becomes frantic, and rising rushes blindly about
often doing itself considerable damage.

TREATMENT.—Give A.A., and J.K., alternately every two hours. In addition
to this give a plentiful supply of liquids, such as linseed tea, 2 to 3
buckets daily; also enemas of warm water with a little salt are often
helpful. During convalescence the diet should consist of sloppy food
with plenty of water and salt.


                            Irregular Teeth

May be looked for if an animal presents the following symptoms: The
beast becoming thinner gradually, and eating less food than usual;
slaver dribbling from the mouth along with half-chewed food, especially
while the cow is cudding; she is “hoven” or bloated at different times;
a bad smell comes from the mouth, arising from ulceration of the side of
the cheek, caused by irregular teeth.

TREATMENT.—The mouth must be carefully examined, and all long or
irregular teeth must be shortened and smoothed by means of the
tooth-rasp.

Gastritis—Gast ro-Enteritis—Inflammation of the Stomach

DEFINITION.—Gastritis is inflammation of the mucous membrane of the
abomasum, extending, generally, into the duodenum (gastro-enteritis). It
is not of unfrequent occurrence, and usually accompanies enteritis. (See
next section). It is a very dangerous disease, and frequently terminates
fatally.

CAUSES.—They are the same as those of enteritis—improper food, musty
hay, acrid plants, impure water, etc.

SYMPTOMS.—The beast is heavy, dejected, restless, scrapes the ground
with the fore feet, strikes the belly with the hind feet, grinds the
teeth, looks around at its flanks and belly, groans, lows; the look is
sad, the eyes red; the ears, horns and feet cold; the muzzle dry; the
abdomen somewhat swollen and extremely tender; there is diarrhea and
vomiting, and cessation or deterioration of milk, which, when drawn, is
thin, yellowish, stringy, and irritates the udder; sometimes it is
reddish and offensive. Spasms and colic are occasionally so intense as
to make the animal furious. M. Gelle has observed that the most constant
symptoms of gastritis are: loss of appetite, arrest of rumination, and
abnormal condition of the tongue. If the inflammation be intense, the
tongue appears to be contracted, straighter and more rounded than usual,
red at the point and along the edges, and the papillæ are elevated and
injected. In some intense cases, when several of the viscera are
involved, the tongue is yellow or green.

TREATMENT.—A.A., is the first and principal remedy, and may be given, at
first, a dose every half hour or hour. As the animal improves, the
intervals between the doses may be prolonged, and only at the
conclusion, when the animal has become free from the more active
symptoms, or they have subsided, the J.K., may be given for the
remaining debility of the digestive organs.

No solid food should be given until convalescence sets in. Small
quantities of fluids may be given in the form of oatmeal or flour gruel,
or water.


                  Enteritis—Inflammation of the Bowels

DEFINITION.—Inflammation of the intestines, throughout a greater or less
extent of their course, and involving all the coats of the intestines or
only the mucous lining.

It generally attacks cattle of middle age and robust health; sometimes
appears as an epidemic in certain districts, and seems to be most
prevalent in hot summers.

CAUSES.—Sudden exposure to cold, or drinking cold water when heated;
eating acrid or unwholesome plants; mildewed food; too stimulating diet;
drinking impure water; sudden change from poor to rich food; colds,
injuries inflicted on the abdomen, the presence of a large number of
worms in the intestines; badly managed colic, continuing more than
twenty hours, and ending in enteritis; animals inflicted with colic may
so injure themselves by falling or rolling over that this complaint may
be the consequence.

SYMPTOMS.—Shivering, dullness, extreme restlessness; frequent lying down
and rising again, with signs of pain in the bowels; hard, small and
rapid pulse; quickened breathing; hot mouth and violent thirst; red and
protruding eyes; pawing and kicking; frequent efforts to urinate, but no
water, or only a few drops, are discharged; the pain, which is most
intense and constant, is increased by pressure and moving about. The
hair is rough, the loins tender, the abdomen swollen on the left side,
and incapable of bearing pressure; the bowels are obstinately confined;
the fæces hard and glazed with slime; but occasionally liquid dung is
forced with dreadful agony through the hardened mass obstructing the
lower bowel, and all previous symptoms become aggravated. If the latter
disease lasts a few days, and there is a sudden cessation of pain, this
is a sign that _gangrene_ (mortification) has set in; the feet and ears
become quite cold, and after a while the animal falls heavily, struggles
convulsively for a brief period, and dies.

DIAGNOSIS.—As the symptoms of this violent complaint resemble, in many
respects, those of colic, it may be well to point out the distinctions
between the one and the other.

                DIFFERENCES BETWEEN COLIC AND ENTERITIS
 ──────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────
               COLIC               │            ENTERITIS
 ──────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────
 The attack is sudden.             │The disorder generally comes on
                                   │gradually.
 The pain is intermittent.         │The pain is incessant and
                                   │increases.
 The pain is relieved by friction  │The pain is aggravated by friction
 and motion.                       │and movement.
 Debility is not a characteristic  │Debility is very characteristic.
 till near the end of the disorder.│

TREATMENT.—A.A., should be given at first, a dose every fifteen minutes,
and after an hour, a dose every thirty minutes, and after three or four
hours, a dose once an hour, which should be continued until the disease
yields; only should there be considerable gas or bloating, or extreme
pain, a dose or two of F.F., may be interposed.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—Hot water is a valuable adjunct in the treatment of the
disease. It may be applied externally by steeping cloths in the water,
and closely and compactly, but not too tightly applying them to the body
and securing them by belts. Hot water may also be given, either as a
drench or as an injection. The water must not be so hot as to scald the
animal. The administration of A.A., as stated above, and hot water
applied copiously to the body of the animal locally, and occasionally in
doses of from a half-pint to a pint internally, will constitute the
principal features of the treatment at the commencement of an attack. If
applications of hot water are used, the animal should be afterwards
rubbed dry and well covered with suitable dry cloths.

If discovered in time, an inflammation of the digestive organs will
generally yield to the prompt use of the above remedies. Linseed tea, or
oatmeal gruel, will form the most suitable diet.


               Peritonitis—Inflammation of the Peritoneum

Inflammation of the membrane which invests the abdominal viscera is very
similar to enteritis. It is rapid in its course, generally ending
fatally in six or eight days.

CAUSES.—Lesions, contusions, and wounds of the walls of the abdomen;
surgical operations, castration, sudden cold, infection while calving.

SYMPTOMS.—Inflammatory fever; the animal shows great sensitiveness when
the abdomen is touched, shrinking when any one approaches it, or flexing
the painful part when it is touched; looks around at the seat of pain;
generally there is swelling of the belly and tightness about the flanks.
The beast rarely lies down, or, if it attempts it, rolls on its back;
when standing, it keeps the extremities near the centre of gravity, and
bends the back downward. The abdomen is hot, the ears and hoofs cold;
the pulse rapid, short and wiry. The termination may be in acute
ascites, in adhesions of the peritoneum, or in gangrene, the latter
being recognized by sudden cessation of pain, small, weak and
intermittent pulse, and rapid prostration.

TREATMENT.—The cause of the infection must first be removed, and this
may require the assistance of a Veterinarian. A. A. is the proper
medicine and should be given fifteen drops every half hour as long as
there is any hope of a favorable termination. It will do all the good
that any medicine can do.


                         Flukes, or Rottenness

This term is applied to the condition caused by the presence of fluke
worms in the liver or bile ducts, where they sometimes exist in large
numbers, causing great swelling of the liver.

CAUSE.—The disease is chiefly developed in low districts, and after damp
seasons. The worms are taken in with the food and developed in the
liver.

SYMPTOMS.—Depression, sadness, inertness, loss of appetite; watery, red,
yellowish, purulent eyes; yellowish tint of all parts not covered with
hair; fœtid smell of nose and mouth; hard skin; dull, erect hair;
irregularity of excrement, which is white, watery and fœtid.

TREATMENT.—The principal remedies are A. A., at first, and then, after a
day, alternate C. C., with the A. A., a dose once in three or four
hours.




                          CHAPTER IV.—PART II.
            DISEASES OF THE URINARY AND REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS


                     Suppressed or Scanty Urination

This is usually the result of some disease of the kidneys, or a mere
symptom of other morbid condition, or it may arise from a paralytic
condition of the bladder itself. This condition will generally be
promptly relieved by giving a few doses of H. H., twenty drops, at
intervals of four, six or twelve hours, according to the urgency of the
case.


                 Inflammation of the Kidneys, Nephritis

This disease has many symptoms in common with cystitis, or inflammation
of the bladder, and its treatment scarcely differs. It occasionally
occurs in cattle, and may be excited by blows upon the loins, calculi,
or small stones formed in the kidneys, or by eating poisonous plants, or
the use of strong allopathic medicines.

SYMPTOMS.—The animal brings the fore legs together, bends the back
downward, and presses with pain when endeavoring to pass water; the
loins are hot, more so than the remainder of the body, sometimes even
burning. The rectum is hot, dung scanty and passed with pain. There is a
great desire to pass water, but only a few drops escape, which is at
first limpid, then thick, and of a deep red color. The gait is stiff,
appetite gone, no rumination, but great thirst.

TREATMENT.—Give H. H., a dose of twenty drops, every two, three or four
hours, according to the intensity of the disease.


                 Inflammation of the Bladder, Cystitis

This disease is not so common in cattle as in horses, but may be
occasioned by cold or injuries in the region of the loins. It is
manifested by the following.—

SYMPTOMS.—The animal constantly keeps the back arched; the walk is
stiff, and the animal, when standing, leans against something on one
side or the other; frequent effort to pass water, but to little purpose,
as only a small quantity, of deep red color, is passed at a time. The
bowels are bound, evacuations scanty and passed with pain. There is no
appetite or rumination, but intense thirst; the eyes are prominent, and
the countenance evinces great distress.

TREATMENT.—The H.H., will be found perfectly appropriate, and may be
repeated, in doses of twenty drops, every three or four hours, until
entire relief is experienced.


              Hematuria—Discharge of Blood with the Urine

The discharge of blood with the urine is more apt to be a symptom of
some other disease, such as Inflammation of the Kidneys or Bladder, or
Texas Fever, than to be a disease in itself, although it may occur as
such.

SYMPTOMS.—Hematuria usually attacks cattle at pasture on low marshy
land. At first the quantity of blood is small, but it gradually
increases, and it often forms clots which stop up the passages, causing
retention of urine and even bursting of the bladder. The animal grows
weak and pale, and sometimes drops of blood are seen on the hairs around
the opening.

In some cases the animal appears to recover, but in a little while
another attack occurs. The disease usually ends fatally, but only after
about two years.

TREATMENT.—Although this disease is usually fatal, it is not known to be
contagious; therefore we advise making every effort to save the animal.
Give H.H., twenty drops every four hours at first, and as the disease
mends, night and morning.


                              Parturition

The natural period of gestation is about nine calendar months, or from
270 to 285 days. For a month or three weeks before the time of
calving—or, if poorly in condition, two months—the cow should be allowed
to dry; otherwise the unnourished calf will be of little value when it
is born. If the cow be milked too long, there is also danger of bringing
down the new milk and causing puerperal fever, or inflammation of the
udder. On the other hand, a cow should not be fed too high. For some
weeks, as the time approaches, the food should be limited in quantity,
and be given more frequently, otherwise the rumen will be so distended
with food or gas as to press upon the uterus, alter the position of the
fetus, and thus render parturition difficult.

Cows, when well attended to, calve very easily and require little
assistance. For a few days there is a mucous discharge from the vagina;
the animal is restless and uneasy; groans, and breathes more quickly;
the udder rapidly enlarges; the abdomen drops. The cow should be allowed
to be quiet; it is a cruel and dangerous practice to rouse and drive her
about. The restlessness soon increases; the cow keeps getting up and
lying down; at last she remains on the ground, and, if all goes well,
the calf is soon born. The expulsive pains cause the exit of a
considerable quantity of fluid, or of a pouch full of serum. When this
pouch bursts, the pains increase and the calf is expelled. If there be
any difficulty, the fetus may be drawn forward during a pain. The cord
breaks of itself, at some distance from the umbilicus. The _afterbirth_,
_cleansing_, or _placenta_, is not always passed at once; it may remain
for several hours partly or wholly within the womb, causing some danger
of fatal consequences; but manual interference should not be allowed
till the action of medicines has been found ineffectual for its removal.

TREATMENT.—The general treatment has been sufficiently indicated in the
foregoing. If the labor be tedious, a dose of A.A., will often help.
After two hours, another dose might be given; and in some extreme cases,
when the pains have nearly ceased, a dose of the G.G.; will often help.

The animal should be kept in a roomy, well-aired place, free from
superfluous litter, covered immediately after calving if the least
danger be apprehended; fed sparingly for some days, principally on
mashes and small quantities of hay.

The udder should be frequently and well stripped of its contents.


                   Failure to come in Heat—Sterility

Failure to breed in the cow may occur in two different forms—first
impotence, in which the cow fails to come in heat, and second, true
sterility, in which, although she came in heat and was bred the service
proved unfruitful.

The first of these cases may be due to some malformation of the sexual
organs in which case it is incurable; but it is more often due to
insufficient or over-feed, or lack of exercise, or over-work, or some
depressing disease.

TREATMENT.—Correct the exercise and feeding, and give G.G., every night
for a week, or, if the case is urgent, a dose morning and night, and
then a dose daily until the result is manifest.

TRUE STERILITY may also be caused by malformations and be incurable, but
is more often caused by other things such as a catarrhal condition of
the vagina—Leucorrhea or to ardent heat, or insufficient food, or
debility from disease.

THE TREATMENT for Leucorrhea or a catarrhal condition of the organs,
which may be known by a constant or frequent discharge from the vagina,
give G.G., each morning and J.K., at night, and continue this for
several weeks, or until she is again served.

In addition dissolve one cake of fresh compressed yeast in a pint of
tepid water, then after a few hours, add another pint. Then wash the
vagina well with soap and water and use the dissolved yeast as a douche,
this should be done daily for several days.

Where there is an excess of excitement, too ardent or too frequent, or
even constant heat, give at first, H.H., a dose morning and night, for
two or three weeks, then a dose or two of G.G., and the result will
usually be satisfactory.

Where there is unthriftiness or want of good condition, correct the
feeding and give G.G., morning and J.K., at night.


                         Cleaning after Calving

In some cases, from torpidity of the calf-bed, the afterbirth is
retained, which may result in very serious consequences.

A dose of twenty drops of G.G., will soon cause its expulsion and the
healthy cleaning of the animal. It may be repeated, at intervals of four
hours, if necessary.


                         Flooding after Calving

Some blood is necessarily lost after calving, and it is only when the
amount is excessive or continues some time, or threatens to weaken or
destroy the animal, that the term flooding can be applied to it. It may
be occasioned by injuries received during the process of delivery, or
from the calf-bed not sufficiently contracting from atony or want of
vigor or that organ.

The symptoms need not be described; any continuous flowing from the
bearing, before or after delivery, and especially after the passage of
the cleansing, should receive medication.

TREATMENT.—The cow should be kept quiet and be permitted to lie down,
and twenty drops of the G.G., be given every hour, or even every half
hour, in urgent cases.

Cold injections, cold, wet cloths, applied to the loins, or cold water
poured upon the belly, are not necessary, and are not without danger.


                               Sore Teats

The teats crack into sores, which become painful, and discharge, the
contents mingling with the milk; the pain occasioned during milking
renders the cow restive, and soon tends to make her vicious and to keep
back her milk; garget, hence, is apt to arise from the milk remaining in
the udder and causing irritation.

TREATMENT.—HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL is sovereign for SORE TEATS. In bad
cases, wash the teats carefully with warm water; and after drying with a
soft cloth, apply the VETERINARY OIL, which repeat morning and night,
simply oiling the sore places or cracks. Give also I.I., morning and
night; and after three or four days the J.K., unless indeed the trouble
has not been quite cured by the use of the I.I., and the VETERINARY OIL.


                  Garget, or Inflammation of the Udder

This is most liable to arise after the first calving, and may be traced
to exposure to cold and damp, especially if the cow is in good
condition, or from not milking the cow clean, so that the milk remains
and causes irritation, or, in some cases, the bag may be wounded by
lying upon it.

SYMPTOMS.—A portion of the bag becomes hot, painful and swollen; then
hard lumps or “cakes” can be felt in the teats, or in one portion of the
bag; other parts of it become affected in the same way; the pulse is
full, quick and hard; breathing is quickened; the mouth and horns hot;
bowels bound, and other symptoms of fever are present. If the disease is
allowed to go on, the fever becomes more severe; the cow does not eat or
chew the cud; the swelling, previously hard, becomes soft from the
formation of matter; the milk becomes mixed with matter, and, in some
cases, with blood. If the disease is not arrested or matter is not let
out, it will spread, making its way slowly to the skin, through which it
at last bursts, leaving deep, long ulcers, which heal with difficulty,
and in many cases a portion of the udder is lost, as regards its power
to produce milk. If this result is avoided by judicious treatment, some
hardness may remain, which requires time to remove.

TREATMENT.—Keep the udder well milked out, and give the A.A., in
alternation with C.C., and apply HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL. This will
generally disperse the heat, hardness and inflammation. But should
suppuration have come on, and the abscess point showing a soft spot,
lance it, and continue C.C., and VETERINARY OIL, morning and night.


           Dropping after Calving—Milk Fever—Puerperal Fever

This disease is of frequent occurrence and quite liable to be fatal,
unless under proper homeopathic treatment. It is much more prevalent
some seasons than others, owing, doubtless, to peculiar atmospheric
conditions, and is more malignant some seasons than others.

There are certain causes which predispose to this disease; thus fat;
stall-fed cows are more liable to it than poor or lean ones; the
complaint is more common in the variable weather of early spring and
late fall; a cow once having the disease is more liable to a return than
others. The exciting causes are: exposure to cold and wet; driving the
cow a long journey too soon; giving too much or too rich food soon after
calving.

SYMPTOMS.—This fever usually begins shortly after calving, usually
within twenty-four hours; if three or four days pass over, the cow may
be considered safe from an attack. The earlier symptoms are: the cow
refuses her food or only eats a little of it; she is depressed, hangs
her head and looks dull; the horns are hot; the nose, instead of being
damp with healthy dew, becomes hot and dry; the urine is scanty; the
bowels are confined, or, if moved, the dung is hard and lumpy; the pulse
is quicker and fuller than in health; the breathing is quickened and
attended with heaving at the flanks.

To these warning symptoms are added, with more or less rapidity, the
more formidable ones, which are often first to attract the attention of
the owner. The milk is reduced in quantity or entirely stopped; the eyes
glisten and look bright and staring; the white of the eye is covered
with numerous red streaks, or is of a leaden color; the eye-balls are
thrust forward in their sockets, and give the cow a somewhat wild and
anxious expression; the hind legs seem weak, and are separated a little
from each other; she appears to stand uneasily upon them, resting for a
time on one foot and then changing to the other; this paddling and
shifting from one leg to another continues as the difficulty of standing
increases, until the animal supports herself by leaning against the
stall; she does not chew the cud; all discharge from the bearing is
stopped; the calf is neglected; the pulse becomes slower than before,
and the breathing more difficult; the udder is hard and swelled, and
little or no milk can be drawn from it; gradually becoming worse, the
weakness in the hind legs increases, so they can no longer support her;
she staggers and sways about, falling, at length, heavily on the ground;
she struggles, tries to rise again, and may or may not succeed, but in
either case soon loses the power of rising, and lies helpless upon the
ground. In this stage of the complaint the symptoms vary. In some cases
we have the following: The cow tosses her head from side to side,
writhes her body and lashes her tail, struggles, stretches out her hind
legs, moans and bellows, and seems to suffer great pain. The breathing
is also difficult and labored; the skin covered with clammy sweat; the
paunch enormously swollen from accumulated gas. Unless this swelling
subsides, the breathing becomes more difficult and labored; the pulse
more rapid and oppressed, so as scarcely to be counted; the legs very
cold; pain is worse; fetid gas rises from the stomach, and death ensues.

In other cases the foregoing symptoms are absent, or exist only in a
slight degree; and we have the following: The cow lies stretched out at
full length on her side, or her head is brought to the opposite side,
with the nose towards the shoulder and the chin on the ground; or the
head is twisted directly backward, with the nose held out and the horns
upon the shoulder, in the most awkward manner. The eyes are dim and
glassy; the pupils are dilated, rounded, and do not contract at the
approach of light; the ears drop; the mouth is partly open; the lower
jaw drops if the head is raised; she has not the power to hold up her
head; she has lost the sense of feeling, and can scarcely swallow, if at
all; difficult, rattling breathing; pulse weak, slow and intermittent,
or even imperceptible; horns, legs and surface cold and chilly; swelling
of the belly increases; udder swelled, hard and sometimes red on the
outside; in some cases dung and urine suppressed. All these symptoms
become worse by degrees, and unless relieved, death ensues generally
within two days from the attack, sometimes in a few hours.

TREATMENT.—The symptoms of this disease appear so suddenly, and run so
rapid a course, that if the disease is prevailing, or there is reason
from any cause to apprehend it, the cow should be watched about the time
of calving, and a dose or two, of fifteen drops, of A.A., should be
given soon after. This will act as a preventive, and arrest any
premonitions of the disease, and we would counsel its continuance; at
least an occasional dose, morning and night, for two or three days. It
will favor the early and feverless production of milk.

Should the disease have made its appearance with evident fever, unequal
warmth, bloating, suppressed discharge from the bearing, etc., give
A.A., a dose of twenty drops, every two or three hours, until the
disease is arrested.

Only in the last extremity, with labored breathing, extreme bloating,
and entire loss or rapid failure of strength, the I.I., may be
alternated with the A.A., at intervals of two hours, in doses of twenty
drops, until the system rallies, when the two medicines may be continued
at longer intervals.

NURSING AND CARE.—The cow should be placed in a clean, roomy stall, so
as to be allowed to rise and to be attended with facility; laid on
clean, dry straw, no dung allowed to remain, and be comfortably clothed,
according to the season. The milk should be frequently drawn off and the
udder hand rubbed. She should be with the fore part of her body higher
than the hinder part, or on a level, with her legs under her in a
natural position. She must be on her side and supported by bundles of
straw, and on no account be allowed to lie out full stretched, in which
position she will become worse and surely die. Small quantities of warm
gruel are best for food.

There have lately come into vogue “Milk Fever Outfits” by means of which
the udder is filled with sterilized air. While there can be no objection
to this treatment either alone or in conjunction with the A.A. In our
experience the A.A. alone is quite sufficient.


                                Abortion

Abortion or premature birth may occur from three different causes:

1—ACCIDENTAL ABORTION.—Caused by a blow; strain; slipping on a wet
floor, over-strain from pulling a heavy load, etc.

2—ENZOOTIC ABORTION.—Due to some infectious disease of the mother.

3—CONTAGIOUS ABORTION.—A distinct disease which causes the death and
expulsion of the fetus or its expulsion in a feeble state prior to the
normal period.

SYMPTOMS OF THREATENED ABORTION.—In the first three months of pregnancy,
the appearance of a bloody, watery or mucous discharge from the vagina.
In the later months, uneasiness, swelling, heat and tenderness about the
udder; secretion of milk; and straining as if in labor.

TREATMENT OF THREATENED ABORTION.—Give fifteen drops of G.G., every six
hours, and the dose may be repeated two or three or more times should
the threatening symptoms continue after the first or even the second
dose has expended its action.

This interval should elapse between doses, as too rapid ones may even
defeat the object, by over-excitement of the system, while a single dose
often arrests an abortion if permitted to expand its action.

After a cow has actually aborted, it is almost impossible to tell
whether it occurred from contagious abortion or from some other cause,
so the safe thing to do is to act as if it had been contagious abortion.

TREATMENT OF CONTAGIOUS ABORTION.—The fetus and membranes should be
burned. The premises occupied by the sick animal should be disinfected
as follows: Remove all bedding and dirt possible and spray all available
parts of barn with 3% formalin or 5% carbolic acid solution. Apply white
wash containing 1 lb. chloride of lime to 3 gallons of whitewash,
scatter quicklime on floor and gutters.

The animal which has aborted should receive daily a vaginal irrigation
of two gallons of warm water containing 2% lysol until the vaginal
discharge stops. The external parts about the vagina, including the hips
and tail, should be washed thoroughly with soap and water and then with
the lysol solution as above, twice daily. This should also be done to
all exposed pregnant animals in the herd, being careful not to use the
same cloth, solution, bucket or attendant, for the well animals that was
used for the sick one.

Also give G.G., at intervals of six hours.


                   Falling and Protrusion of the Womb

After a difficult labor, or when manual help has been injudiciously
applied, the womb may be everted or turned inside out. The organ then is
partly or quite protruded and appears as a deep red mass covered with
smooth red bodies (glands).

In order to replace, the cow should stand with the hind feet higher than
the fore feet, the hand of the operator should be wrapped with a soft
cloth soaked in warm milk and smeared with HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL,
and _gentle pressure_ should be _continuously and carefully_ applied to
the mass until it gradually returns to its proper position. Dry or
inflamed parts should be washed in warm milk and kept well anointed with
the VETERINARY OIL. Give also A.A., at first every three hours, and
later alternate G.G., with the A.A., a dose once in six hours.

Where CASES of SIMPLE PROTRUSION OF THE ORGAN occur without
retroversion, give A.A., morning and G.G., at night, feeding light
easily digested food, which will be effective.




                          CHAPTER V.—PART II.
                          MECHANICAL INJURIES


                                 Burns

Injury to the skin and sub-cutaneous tissue by any hot body requires
careful treatment, not only because of the local damage, but also
because of possible injury to the system.

The air must be excluded as much as possible; and the less the injured
part is disturbed the better. It will be found advantageous to apply one
piece of linen, smeared with HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL, next to the
wound, so that it may not be necessary to remove it; then over that a
piece of several thicknesses, which may be removed for the purpose of
applying the VETERINARY OIL. Often the part may be so situated that the
plaster or covering cannot be conveniently kept in place; then the only
application will be the VETERINARY OIL, simply applied with the end of
the finger, so as to keep the sore or burned place moist. Slight
superficial burns require only the application of the oil as above.
During the healing, simply apply the VETERINARY OIL.

Give, also, for extensive burns, or deep burns, or scalds, the A.A.,
every two or three hours at first, then morning and at night. In extreme
cases, or with extensive ulcerations, give I.I., in alternation with
A.A., after the first fever has subsided.


                            Contusion—Bruise

Is defined as an injury inflicted on the surface of the body by
mechanical violence, without laceration of the skin. It may be slight,
involving only the rupture of minute vessels, or it may tear the
muscular fibres, or wound a large blood vessel.

CAUSES.—Blows from sticks; butts from horns; pressure of the yoke on
draught oxen.

TREATMENT.—For slight affections of this kind, in the nature of a
bruise, bathe the part with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, three or four
times per day, and as often give a dose of the B.B. This will soon
remove the lameness and stiffness and restore the part, as well as ward
off injurious consequences. The administration of the B.B., should never
be omitted in these cases.


                                Sprains

These injuries affect the ligaments that connect the joints, and are
caused by false steps, slipping, or by forcibly twisting or contorting
the joints to an extent beyond that permitted by the natural limitations
of flexion.

Sprains happen to various members—the coronet joint, the fetlock, the
shoulder, etc. The pain, swelling and inflammation which accompany these
accidents are proportioned to the extent of the injury.

GENERAL TREATMENT.—This consists in affording rest to the limb,
mitigating the pain and subduing inflammatory action. Also apply to the
part, when you know where it is, HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, but in
all such cases give the B.B., for strains, lameness, etc., a dose at
first, four times per day, and later, morning and night.

=Sprain of the Shoulder.=—Draught oxen are particularly subject to this
affection, which is caused by excessive exertion in drawing, false
steps, slips or external violence.

SYMPTOMS.—There is heat, pain, stiffness and imperfect mobility of the
limb; the animal trails it with evident pain; does not raise it easily
over any obstacle; when standing, rests the weight of the body on the
opposite side.

TREATMENT.—Give the animal rest, and a dose of the B.B., three times per
day.

=Sprain of the Haunch.=—Inability to move the hind quarters and
extremities is due to the same causes as sprain of the shoulder.

SYMPTOMS.—Limping and dragging the hind legs; when standing, the beast
keeps them apart. In severe cases it can neither stand nor walk, but
falls down, unable to rise. Sometimes the lumbar region is hot, swollen
and painful.

TREATMENT.—The same as for other sprains. Give a dose of B.B., three
times per day.

=Sprain of the Loins.=—The causes, symptoms and treatment of this
affection are much the same as for sprain of the haunch.

OTHER MEANS.—In some sprains it will be advisable to precede the
medicinal treatment by applications of warm water, and afterwards to dry
the parts with a cloth before applying HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL or
HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL. After the swelling has subsided, the animal
may only very gradually return to its accustomed work. Give, always, a
dose of B.B., morning and night, or even three times per day.


                                Choking

Foreign bodies in the œsophagus—obstruction of the gullet. Roots that
have not been cut into small pieces before they are given to the cattle
are sometimes swallowed, especially if the beasts be very hungry. There
is no doubt about the symptoms, as the body may often be felt
externally, while difficulty of breathing, and violent action of the
muscles of deglutition, with a view to expel the intruder, indicate what
is the matter. Prompt action is necessary, as the animal, if not
relieved, becomes hoven or wind blown.

TREATMENT.—If the obstruction be near the top of the gullet, it may be
removed by the hand put through the mouth and protected by a common
balling-iron.

Try also pouring some oil or thin grease into the gullet through a horn
inserted into the mouth.

A pinch or small spoonful of coarse gun-powder put far back _under the
animal’s tongue_, will often cause a violent regurgitation or vomiting,
which brings up the offending substance.

Give also F.F., every half hour, if the animal is bloated or distressed
with wind, or the J.K., if suffering from indigestion.

If it be too far down the œsophagus for removal in this manner, the
obstruction must be pushed into the stomach. For this purpose a probang
must be carefully used. A good, common probang, which will not lacerate
the gullet, may be readily made from a piece of firm rope, from
half-inch to an inch in diameter and four or five feet long. Wind the
end of this from two or three inches down to near the end with firm,
strong twine, so as to make a firm square, not pointed end. Secure the
twine carefully in the strands, so it will not unravel, or yet better,
wind the ends of the cord along in the strands of the rope to the
handle. Then smear the bulb and rope with lard, and pass the probang
down to the obstruction, and, using it like a ram-rod, drawing it back
but a few inches at a stroke, you can readily drive down the
obstruction, without danger of lacerating the gullet, as you are in
great danger of doing by using a “rakestail” or other piece of stiff
wood, causing the death of the patient.


                                 Wounds

Animals are often exposed to wounds, which differ in character and
importance, according to the manner in which they have been produced,
the extent of the injury, and the part wounded.

=Incised Wounds= are produced by instruments with sharp edges; these
wounds have no jagged edges, and heal most rapidly.

=Stab Wounds= may not appear very considerable on the surface, but may
be very serious, as important parts may have been injured. If a bowel
has been cut, blood is generally discharged from the anus, or the
contents of the bowel escape through the external wound. If the parts
around a stab wound soon begin to swell, blood-vessels and intestines
have probably been injured, and extravasation of blood takes place.

=Lacerated Wounds= are caused by rough and blunt bodies, have a jagged
and uneven appearance, and, although large and important blood-vessels
have been divided, in general there is but little bleeding.

TREATMENT.—If dirt, wood, glass, sand, shot, or any other substance have
got into the wound, remove them by a sponge and cold water; in some
cases a syringe may be required for this purpose. If there is much
bleeding, this must be arrested by using a sponge dipped in cold water,
or with HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL or HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL, and
gently pressed upon the wound. If _arteries_ have been severed, they
will have to be grasped with a pair of forceps, and drawn slightly and
gently forward, so that they may be securely tied by means of a strong
ligature of silk. You may know an artery has been injured by the blood
being bright red and coming in spurts. The healing of _cut-wounds_ is
facilitated by bringing the edges together by means of adhesive plaster,
or by stitching them. Before sewing up a wound, the bleeding should have
ceased, and the operator must be careful that all foreign bodies, loose
shreds of tissue, and clots of blood are carefully removed; otherwise
inflammation will be produced, and the stitches will have to be removed.
The sides of the wound should first be placed closely together, as
before injury; each thread should be tied by itself, so that if one
stitch breaks out, others may remain undisturbed. Well-waxed silk or
strong thread should be used, and as many stitches inserted as may be
necessary to unite the edges of the wound.

Give A.A., and apply the VETERINARY OIL in all cases of injury.


                          Caries of the Bones

SYMPTOMS.—Swelling of the bones; great tenderness to the touch;
frequently a suppurating wound. The disease is very serious, and very
difficult to cure.

TREATMENT.—You may give the J. K., each morning, and the I.I., at night,
with advantage.


                               Fractures

=Horns.=—When a cow breaks a horn there is considerable hemorrhage,
which should be arrested by applications of HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH
HAZEL. If the horn be warm, it is just possible to restore it by
immediately putting it in its place and fixing it there with bandages.
The animal should then be tied up to a ring, by itself, so that it
cannot rub against anything. The stump, or replaced horn, should be
wrapped in cloths after being well covered with HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY
OIL. B.B., should be given internally, once or twice per day.

=Bones.=—The _ossa ilium_, or flank bones, are most liable to fracture.

TREATMENT.—In fractures, wherever situated, it is indispensable to keep
the part at rest as much as possible; consequently most fractures
incidental to cattle admit of no efficatious treatment. In simple
fractures, where the proper splints and bandages can be applied,
recovery may ensue.


                            Poisonous Plants

Cattle sometimes eats poisonous plants, such as acrid buds of oak, twigs
of yew, the water hemlock, and others, and consequently suffer and die.
Unless it is known that they have had access to such plants, it is not
always easy to determine the nature of the disorder from which they are
suffering. If there be suspicion of poisoning, the following treatment
may be pursued, when the symptoms seem to indicate it.

SYMPTOMS.—Torpor; refusal of food; excessive thirst; distention; the
animal shows signs of great agony, grinds its teeth, stamps, paws the
ground, strikes its flanks, rolls on the ground, as if with spasms or
colic. Sometimes there is great fury, ending in torpor, paralysis,
death.

TREATMENT.—The stomach-pump should be employed; water thrown into the
rumen till vomiting ensues. This should be repeated till the stomach is
emptied.

In general, however, and unless the animal be very valuable and the
circumstances favorable, such means are not available, and you can only
give the F.F. and J.K., in alternation, one dose every half hour, or
hour, according to the urgency of the case.


                                 Eczema

Eczema is a disease of the skin and in general appearance is much like
mange, but is unlike mange in the fact that it is not caused by
parasites, and therefore is not contagious.

Several forms of eczema are observed in cattle.

1—An acute form which attacks the legs; there is dullness and loss of
appetite, followed by swelling, stiffness and elevated points of hair on
the legs.

2—There is a chronic form attacking various parts of the body with loss
of hair and crusts.

3—There is still another form caused by eating too much potato pulp,
this attacks the legs with redness, swelling, crusts and general loss of
condition.

Eczema may be told from mange by the absence of the parasites, which in
cattle can usually be seen by the naked eye; also in mange the itching
is much more intense than in eczema.

TREATMENT.—First clean the sores, removing all dirt, scabs, etc. For
this purpose, olive oil is better than water, as soap and water are apt
to cause further irritation. Apply Zinc Ointment night and morning. Give
A.A., three times per day, for two days, then I.I. instead of A.A.


                                Warbles

This is often seen on cattle in February and March. It consists of a
number of roundish swelling from five to twenty in number, usually on
the back and sides. The swellings are sometimes as large as the closed
fist.

During the summer months the gadfly lays its eggs on the skin of the
cattle, especially just above the heels. The cattle bite these places
and swallow the eggs; which hatch into larvæ and make their way through
the body to the skin, where they form these swellings. The swellings
suppurate and form a small hole, through which the larvæ breathe and
later escape. After the larvæ have escaped the swellings subside.

TREATMENT.—Warbles may be prevented by keeping the cattle from
swallowing the eggs. Either by brushing off the legs, or by applying
kerosene oil, or a 3% solution of creoline, or one of the proprietary
products for keeping flies off cattle. This should be done night and
morning during July and August.

The larvæ may be killed as soon as the hole is first formed; by
injecting kerosene oil from an ordinary oil can into the aperture, or by
covering the hole with thick grease, which prevents the larvæ from
breathing. When the larvæ are killed the swelling usually soon
disappear.




                               PART III.
                      Diseases of Sheep and Goats


  When a number of Sheep or Goats, or a flock, are to receive medicine,
  the best and most economical, as well as efficient method, is as
  follows: Procure a new or perfectly clean pint bottle and cork, fill
  it two-thirds full of pure water, to which add a _large spoonful, or
  sixty drops_, of the proper remedy, SHAKE IT THOROUGHLY, so as to
  perfectly medicate the whole mass. Of this a dessert spoonful is a
  dose for a sheep or goat. Paste a proper label on the bottle and use
  it only for that remedy, so as to prevent mistake or confusion.




                               CHAPTER I.
                            GENERAL DISEASES


                               Black Leg

Known as _Quarter Ill_, or the _Black Spauld_ of the English Shepherds,
or as one of the “Murrains” of this country. It affects young and
thrifty sheep, and is rarely found in old and poor stock. It is most
common in wet seasons, in the early spring or summer and fall, and when
the feed is very luxuriant. The sheep gorge themselves with the rich
vegetation, and the digestion being over-taxed, the system is
disorganized and the sheep suddenly droop and die. On examination, the
wool leaves the skin at the slightest touch, and the body is found to be
swollen and blackened in large patches, chiefly on the hind or fore
quarter. Air is infiltrated under the skin, and the carcass seems
already decomposed and full of black blood. On examining the flock, some
will be lame or limping, the eyes red, and the mouth and tongue inflamed
and blistered, and on passing the hand over the sides or quarters, they
will be found swollen, the wool readily coming off, and a crepitation be
heard from the confined air beneath. The urine is dark, the bowels
constipated and dung bloody. After a time the animal is unable to stand,
and falls upon the side; stretches out the limbs and in a few hours is
dead.

The disease is worse on moist, rich bottom lands, and is rare on dry
hills or gravelly soils. To prevent the disease, such soils and
localities should be avoided, and the sudden changes from poor to such
rich and succulent and abundant pasturage.

TREATMENT.—The disease is incurable, and diseased animals should be
killed at once, the bodies burned and the premises disinfected as given
under Abortion, page 122. The healthy animals should be moved to another
pasture and the infected pasture burned off the following winter, this
destroys the germs in that pasture.

Cattle may be rendered immune to Black Leg by vaccination. The vaccine
with directions for its use is given away to stock owners by the Chief
of the Bureau of Animal Industry, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D. C.


                Foot and Mouth Disease—Eczema Epizootica

DEFINITION.—An acute, contagious fever, characterized by the formation
of vesicles and ulcers, chiefly about the mouth and hoofs, etc. The
eruptions appear on the mucous membrane of the mouth, on the fetlock,
and in the cleft of the hoofs, and not unfrequently as a eruption on the
udder. The disorder chiefly prevails among cattle and sheep, but under
favoring circumstances, also attacks other domestic quadrupeds, and even
man.

CAUSES.—It appears as an epidemic, and spreads exclusively by contagion.
The precise nature of the germ is unknown, but it is chiefly limited to
the contents of the vesicles, the secretion of the ulcers, the saliva,
the blood and the natural secretions and excretions, of the diseased
animal; and these convey the disease. The predisposing causes are
exposure to cold, wet, currents of cold air, poor fodder, want of
cleanliness and good housing; and anything that tends to lower the
constitutional vitality. The activity of the virus is preserved for many
months. The poison may be conveyed by the clothes of herdsmen and other
persons, by manure, tools, fodder, by grass and ground previously
trodden by diseased animals, and milk to suckling calves, indeed by
almost anything. It finds its way into the system in various ways, not
depending on any wound for admission. The communication to man is by
drinking the milk of diseased cows. A second attack is rare.

SYMPTOMS.—After a period of incubation, lasting from three to six days,
the animal is seized with a shivering fit, and appears dull and
stupified. A vesicular eruption soon appears on the mouth, the hoofs,
and the teats. Suckling lambs, have a similar eruption on the mouth and
throat, with irritation of the whole alimentary canal, attended with
inability to suck, and exhausting diarrhea. The eyes are then observed
to be dim, watery, congested; the muzzle, ears and horns alternately hot
and cold; shivering ensues; rumination is diminished; the milk is less
in quantity, yellower and thicker than usual, and much deteriorated in
quality; the bag swollen, tender, hot; the back arched; the coat staring
and harsh; the pulse somewhat accelerated; the temperature moderately
elevated, reaching 102°, or even 104°; the eruption in the mouth is
first seen on the inner surface of the upper lip, the edge of the upper
jaw where there are no teeth, on the tip and edges of the tongue, and is
indicated by salivation, by pain and loss of power in taking and eating
food. The vesicles occur on the mucous membrane, singly or in patches,
first as little red spots, then as whitish-yellow, slightly turbid
blisters, about the size of a bean, at first transparent, but
subsequently filled with a puriform fluid. These vesicles burst in about
eighteen hours, discharge their fluid, leaving behind shallow ulcers,
which often run together and then form deep and ragged ulcers. The lips,
cheeks, tongue, and sometimes the Schneiderian membrane, are affected.
The eruption on the feet is first seen around the coronet and in the
interdigital space, especially of the hind legs; and the resulting
vesicles burst quickly, because of the animal’s movements. The animal
evidently suffers intense pain, is lame or unable to stand, and moves
reluctantly or cautiously; the hoofs swell; the vascular secreting
membranes become inflamed; the hoofs are cast; the bones may become
diseased; and serious mischief may ensue. The eruption on the udder
turns to vesicles, as in the mouth, and, when the fluid dries or
escapes, thin scales are formed. The teats are swollen and sore. In
exceptional cases, a vesicular eruption appears on the muzzle, the
mucous membrane of the nostrils, the conjuctivae of the eyes, and the
mucous membrane of the vagina.

In favorable cases, the fever subsides about the fourth day, the
eruption declines, the appetite returns, and in seven to fourteen days
the animal recovers. But complications are not uncommon. And in
unfavorable cases the fever is high, the ulceration increases, the
animal suffers from exhaustion, wasting, discharge of stringy, bloody
mucous from the mouth, and of offensive matter from the nostrils; the
face is swollen, the breath foul, the respiration rapid and grunting;
the pulse small, weak, rapid; the blood becomes impure; the belly and
legs œdematous; the hoofs slough off; diarrhea supervenes, and death
follows about the ninth or tenth day.

PROGNOSIS.—This is unfavorable—The United States Government and the
Health Officers of the several States require all suspected cases of
Foot and Mouth Disease to be quarantined, and upon the full development
of the disease all animals infected to be killed. Human beings are
liable to become infected, great care should be exercised in handling
diseased animals or their carcases.


                     Liver Rot—Liver Fluke Disease

This is a very destructive disease and causes much loss to sheep raisers
each year.

It is caused by a small worm called the Distoma; which is swallowed by
the sheep in water or on grass and which makes its way to the liver,
where it lives. These worms only exist in low damp land, high dry
pastures are free from them.

SYMPTOMS.—The sheep becomes dull and listless, followed by loss of flesh
and strength, the wool comes off easily. The loss of strength continues
and death usually ensues.

TREATMENT.—Since the worms only exist for any length of time in low damp
land; and high dry pastures are usually free from them; the sheep should
be removed to the dry pastures. Rock salt should be given freely to the
infected sheep. There is no known cure for this disease.




                         CHAPTER II.—PART III.
                     DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM


                Encephalitis, Inflammation of the Brain

This disease may arise from internal causes, but more frequently from
sun-stroke, blows upon the head, too plentiful food, etc.

SYMPTOMS.—The animal ceases to eat; hangs its ears and head, which are
hot to the touch; walks along staggering, unconscious whither it goes;
the eyes are bright and red and projected from the head; the air it
expires is hot; the breathing short, rapid and accompanied with violent
beating of the flanks; it remains lying down, head stretched on the
ground, and, as the disease draws to a close, it ends in convulsions.

TREATMENT.—Give A.A., a dose of three or five drops every hour, during
the height of the disease, and then at longer intervals as the case
improves.


                                Apoplexy

In consequence of that plethora, which is the result of over-feeding in
fattening, sheep are quite liable to apoplexy, and when in this
condition they are driven rapidly some distance in warm weather, they
are quite liable to a fit of this disease.

SYMPTOMS.—Generally there are some symptoms which indicate that an
animal is about to have a fit of this very frequent complaint. These
are: Dullness; frequent standing still, or remaining behind the others,
the breathing is quickened; it seems sleepy and unaware of what is going
on around; the eyes appear as if they were blind; the pupils are
reddened and nostrils dilated; pulse is quick and hard; the membranes of
the nose and eyes are red; then, from standing fixed as it were in one
place, it staggers and falls; then is violently convulsed, and, unless
relieved, death speedily ensues.

TREATMENT.—The A.A., if given before the convulsion, a dose of three or
five drops, will often arrest its farther progress. If the fit has taken
place, give the medicine at once, and repeat the dose again after the
animal gets over it, should it survive the fit.


                              Louping Ill

This disease is more common in the spring of the year when it attacks
sheep and particularly lambs.

It begins with twitching and tremblings; sometimes even convulsions. The
animal falls and may even leap into the air. This is later followed by
paralysis of part of the body, and the head being drawn to one side.

This disease is due to bacteria which are transmitted to the sheep by
the grass tick. No cure is known. Diseased sheep should be killed and
the rest of the flock dipped for Scab, as on page 211.


                           Trotters—Nibblers

This is a disease somewhat like louping ill but appears to be
heriditary.

SYMPTOMS.—The sheep trembles when touched and walks with a peculiar
gait, raising the feet high (Trotters). Later there appears to be an
itching, since the animal rubs and bites its hind quarters (Nibblers).
This is followed by wasting, paralysis and death.

TREATMENT.—There is no known cure and diseased animals should be
slaughtered and not bred from.


                             Epilepsy—Fits

In sheep, this disorder frequently occurs on a fine, cold morning in
spring, early summer and autumn, within an hour or two of daybreak. On
rising from its bed, the animal stares, staggers, falls, struggles
convulsively for a few minutes, kicks, rolls its eyes, grinds its teeth,
foams at the mouth, and sometimes involuntarily voids dung and urine.
After a few minutes, or perhaps half an hour, the fit subsides, the
animal rises, seems semi-conscious, presently begins to eat, and appears
to be in good health. These fits may occur daily, and then will soon
become fatal; or, by occasional repetition, they may wear away the
creature’s flesh and strength.

TREATMENT.—A few doses of A.A., on the day of attack, followed by a dose
of A.A., each morning, and of J.K., each night, are the proper remedies.
A change of pasture and shelter should be provided.


                       Rabies—Hydrophobia—Madness

When a mad dog has entered a fold, it is often difficult to determine
which sheep have been bitten and which remain untouched. Careful
examination, one by one, should be made; still uncertainty remains. The
symptoms appear from two to ten or twelve weeks after attack, and are
similar to those which appear in other animals. The sheep annoy and
chase each other, cease to feed, lose flesh, are restless, and manifest
strong and unnatural sexual desire. Ewes become stupified and paralyzed,
and die, often without a struggle. Lambs have convulsive fits,
terminated by death. Rams and wethers, butt their heads against the
ground, palings, banks and one another; running full tilt, with great
violence and frequency, so as to tear the skin from their foreheads.
They usually die in from 3 to 6 days.

TREATMENT.—A.A., should be given every day, to all the flock, for a few
days, then once a week for several weeks. If an animal develops the
symptoms it should be killed at once, since there is no known cure.
However few animals or persons bitten by supposedly mad dogs ever
develop the disease.


              Dizziness, Staggers, Sturdy, Turn-Sick, Gid.

This is a very dangerous and not infrequent disease. Its immediate cause
is the presence of a small worm, inclosed in a hydatid or sack of fluid,
and located either within the substances of the brain, or beneath the
bones of the cranium. These hydatids vary in size, number and position,
being found on the right or left side, indicated by the animal turning
to the right or left, or in the centre of the median line, in which case
it may turn to either side, or not at all, the animal carrying the head
down. When the hydatid occupies the back of the head, the animal holds
the head high, and runs straight forward, throwing itself on any object
it meets.

SYMPTOMS.—As above indicated, the symptoms consist of various forms of
turning, whirling around or standing still, etc. At first, when the
hydatids are small, there may be but little or nothing to indicate their
presence; but as they grow larger, they press upon the bone, and even
enlarge or remove a great portion of it. One side of the head may be
enormously enlarged, or the bone become quite thin, so that the
situation of the cyst may be thus known, and sometimes a small hole may
be discerned. The sacks are more frequently on the left side.

The first effects are: dullness, loss of spirits; they chew the cud
slowly and carelessly; they keep aloof from the other sheep; they
stagger when walking; stand before a pool of water looking into it, and
sometimes tumble in and are drowned; sometimes when eating they appear
as if frightened, and run over the field as if pursued; the head is held
higher or lower, or carried on one side; the body, in moving, inclines
to the same side; the sheep appear to wander about, and gradually lose
flesh and strength; then they begin to turn round and round to one side;
seem quite unconscious of everything around them; the round and round
movements increase until they are almost constant, and the animal at
length dies.

TREATMENT.—Puncturing through the skull into these cysts, when their
presence is known by the swelling, is sometimes successful if the
precise point is known and no other exists. Give A.A., a dose of two or
five drops every night at first, and then at longer intervals. Few sheep
treated survive and unless the animal is very valuable for breeding, it
is better to slaughter as soon as the disease begins to appear. Although
this disease is very hard to handle after it gets started, it can be
easily prevented. The worm which gets into the brain is the larvæ of the
tape worm of the dog, which the sheep gets from eating grass soiled by
the dogs feces. The dog in turn gets this worm from the sheep by eating
the brains which contain the larvæ. The remedy therefore is simple.
Don’t feed uncooked sheeps brains to dogs.




                         CHAPTER III.—PART III.
                 DISEASES OF THE ORGANS OF RESPIRATION


                             Cold, Catarrh

The nose and air-passages are lined with a delicate membrane, whose
office it is to secrete a thin mucous which lubricates the parts. Under
the influence of a chill, suppressed perspiration, etc., this membrane
becomes irritated, inflamed, and the discharge arrested, or it is
thickened, increased, or variously modified.

The symptoms usually are, the sheep is not so lively as usual; he eats
little or no food; he coughs and sneezes; a watery discharge flows from
one or both nostrils, and also from the eyes, which are red and swelled.

In the more severe form, there is a chill, warm skin, quick pulse,
frequent and somewhat difficult breathing, sore throat, pain in the
throat when pinched, frequent cough, rough coat, bound bowels, red eyes,
and red and dry nose; tears flow freely, and little or no food is
eaten—all symptoms indicating a catarrhal fever. As the animal improves,
the discharge from the nose becomes white or yellowish, and more
profuse.

TREATMENT.—When the disease commences with a chill, or any considerable
degree of fever is present, give fifteen drops of the A.A., and repeat
it several times, at intervals of one or two hours. Then alternate the
E.E., with the A.A., at intervals of two or three hours, until the
disease is broken up.


                                 Cough

This is usually a symptom of some primary disorder on the cure of which
it will disappear. It may, however, be a passing irritation. A
persistent cough is suggestive of serious ailment, and, without delay,
give the E.E., and you may save the animal.


                               Laryngitis

Laryngitis, or inflammation of the lining membrane of the windpipe, is
due to cold, changeable weather, etc. It is distinguished from
bronchitis (see next section) by a characteristic _ring_ in the cough.
The open mouth, with outstretched head, indicates difficulty of
breathing and a sense of suffocation. This frequently ensues from
thickening of the membrane and closure of the _rima glottidis_, or
entrance to the windpipe. A.A., a dose two or three times per day, is
the treatment.


           Bronchitis, or Inflammation of the Bronchial Tubes

This disease is usually the result of exposure to cold and wet, or
sudden changes of temperature; it is almost always preceded by a common
cold, which has been neglected or overlooked.

SYMPTOMS.—Cough, which becomes by degrees more painful, frequent and
husky; the countenance becomes anxious and distressed; the breathing is
quick, heaving and obstructed, in consequence of tough, tenacious
phlegm; unwillingness to move; the breath is hot; the cough is increased
by moving about, occurs in fits, and is wheezing in character; no food
is eaten; the animal wastes; skin becomes dry, and is bound to the ribs;
the coat stares and looks unthrifty. The animal may die from extension
of the disease to the substance of the lungs.

TREATMENT.—The earlier stages of this disease, or catarrh, should be
treated at once, as directed under that head. Then a dose or two of the
Remedy for that disease removes all danger.

Remove the animal to a warm but well ventilated stable, and feed on warm
mashes and gruel.

Give first, at intervals of two hours, two or three doses of the A.A.,
twenty drops at a dose. This will allay the heat and fever to some
extent. Then alternate, at intervals of three hours, the E.E., with the
A.A., the same doses, and continue this treatment until restored, only
that the medicine need not be given so frequently after improvement has
progressed.


                  Pneumonia—Inflammation of the Lungs

This disease may be caused by exposure to cold and wet; too severe
weather; sudden changes of weather; cold nights and mornings and hot
middays, are apt to induce it.

SYMPTOMS.—Want of appetite; loss of the cud; dull, staring eyes; ears
are hung down; the head is held up; the mouth open; breathing quick,
labored and difficult, with heaving of the flanks; grating of the teeth;
inside of the nose and white of the eyes much reddened; a discharge, at
first thin and watery, afterwards mattery and offensive, flows from the
nostrils; frequent painful cough, attended with rattling in the throat.
These symptoms gradually become more and more severe, until the animal
dies.

TREATMENT.—The A.A., will generally be found sufficient. Give a dose of
five drops every two hours. Should the disease not yield in a day or
two, the E.E., in doses of five drops, may be alternated with the A.A.,
every three hours.




                         CHAPTER IV.—PART III.
                  DISEASES OF THE ORGANS OF DIGESTION


                    Tympanitis—Hoove—Blown—Maw Bound

This disorder—is of two kinds; one due to the evolution of gas from the
food taken, the other to the impaction of the food. In one case the gas
produces enormous inflation of the rumen, or first of the four stomachs
possessed by sheep, in the other, distention.

           DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DISTENTION FROM GAS AND FOOD
 ──────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────
        DISTENTION FROM GAS        │  DISTENTION FROM IMPACTED FOOD
 ──────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────
 The left flank, on pressure, feels│The left flank, on pressure, feels
 soft, elastic and yielding to the │solid; does not yield readily to
 fingers. On percussion, sound     │the fingers. On percussion, or on
 hollow and drum-like.             │being struck, sound dull.
 Frequent belching; the wind which │No belching or eructation of wind.
 escapes has an offensive smell.   │
 Respiration quick, short and      │Respiration not much interfered
 puffing.                          │with.
 Position standing; head stretched │Position lying down, and is with
 forward, unable to move; moans,   │difficulty induced to move;
 and appears in great distress;    │looking dull and listless.
 eyes red and staring.             │

TREATMENT.—This is the same whether the distention is from gas or
impacted food. F.F. may be given, a dose every quarter or half hour. We
give the method of puncturing, which, however, need never be resorted to
if the F.F. be administered.

_Puncturing._—Relief is sometimes very urgently required, and this is
best afforded either by plunging a trocar into the left side, or by
passing a probang down the œsophagus into the paunch. If the trocar is
used, let the canula on the instrument be ten or twelve inches long, so
as to prevent the paunch from slipping away from the canula and causing
delay, and perhaps further danger. _Chloride of Lime_ is valuable after
the animal is somewhat relieved by the use of the trocar; about two
drachms should be mixed with a quart of water. In case of immediate
relief being imperative, and a trocar not being at hand, a long, sharp
pointed pen-knife may be used for puncturing. The place for puncturing
is midway between the hip and ribs, where the distended rumen is
prominent; the direction is inward and downward. The puncture will be
followed by an outrush of gas, fluid, and even portions of food. A
quill, or some other tube, must be ready to be inserted in the hole
immediately after the knife is withdrawn, otherwise the wound will
close. If nothing tubular be at hand, a smooth piece of stick must be
put in, or anything else that will serve the purpose of keeping open the
wound till the gas has escaped. The danger of this operation is not from
the wound itself, but from the escape of the contents of the paunch into
the abdomen, which would cause peritonitis, or from piercing the spleen
or kidney. The operation can only be regarded as a rough one, to be
adopted in case of great emergency.

When distention has ceased and matters have to some extent resumed their
ordinary course, the animal should remain some hours without food or
water. The food afterwards should be sparing and suitable.

J.K., should be administered two or three times daily until the animal
is fully recovered.


                              Colic—Gripes

This disease is not common in sheep; but lambs over-fed with milk, or
with relishing herbs, or pastured in rank or acrid grass, are subject to
it (see following section on enteritis).

TREATMENT.—F.F., a dose every half hour until relieved.


                 Enteritis, Inflammation of the Bowels

This disease is manifested by the following symptoms: Violent and
constant pain in the bowels, producing at first uneasiness, and then
rolling about on the ground; the sheep almost constantly getting up and
lying down again; it sometimes lies on its back, the ground is pawed,
the belly struck with the hind feet, etc. These symptoms of pain are
attended with confined bowels, quick pulse, cold legs and nose; the
belly is tender when pressed upon.

                DIFFERENCES BETWEEN COLIC AND ENTERITIS
 ──────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────
               COLIC               │            ENTERITIS
 ──────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────
 The attack is sudden.             │The disorder generally comes on
                                   │gradually.
 The pain is intermittent.         │The pain is incessant and
                                   │increases.
 The pain is relieved by friction  │The pain is aggravated by friction
 and motion.                       │and movement.
 Debility is not a characteristic  │Debility is very characteristic.
 till near the end of the disorder.│

TREATMENT.—The A.A., is the appropriate remedy for this disease, and may
be given, five drops every one, two or three hours, according to the
urgency of the disease.

In cases of extreme distress it may be alternated with the F.F., at
intervals of a half hour or hour, until relieved. But usually the first
named Remedy will be quite sufficient.


                                Diarrhea

Purging is most common in spring, and is then occasioned by fresh grass,
to which the flock are unaccustomed; lambs are subject to a severe and
often fatal form of this complaint, caused by the irritation of grass
eaten for the first time. In some instances it may be occasioned by cold
or by a peculiar irritation of the mother’s milk.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease is manifested by discharge of various colors, and
sometimes very profuse. It is accompanied with loss of appetite and
wasting of flesh.

TREATMENT.—If the discharge is merely the effort of nature to rid the
system of some hurtful substance, it will require no interference. But
if it is excessive or wasting, three or five drops of the F.F., given
morning and night, will usually be sufficient to arrest the disease.


                         Flukes, or Rottenness

This term is applied to the condition caused by the presence of fluke
worms in the liver or bile ducts, where they sometimes exist in large
numbers, causing great swelling of the liver.

CAUSE.—The disease is chiefly developed in low districts, and after damp
seasons. The worms are taken in with the food and developed in the
liver.

SYMPTOMS.—Depression, sadness, inertness, loss of appetite; watery, red,
yellowish, purulent eyes; yellowish tint of all parts not covered with
hair; fœtid smell of nose and mouth; hard skin; dull, erect hair;
irregularity of excrement, which is white, watery and fœtid.

TREATMENT.—The principal remedies are A.A., at first, and then, after a
day, alternate C.C., with the A.A., a dose once in three or four hours.


                              Constipation

This is rarely of grave consequence, and when it exists, is usually a
symptom of some other disease. When present, a dose of twenty drops of
the J.K., given morning and night, will soon set all right again. If
there is suspicion of some inflammatory condition lurking in the system,
the A.A., in like doses, will have the like effect.


                                 Dropsy

Is known as the accumulation of water or serous fluid in the abdomen. It
is usually the result of inflammation of the peritoneum or lining
membrane of the abdomen. It may be known by the large and pendulous
condition of the belly, and by percussing or striking one part of the
belly, while the other hand is held against another part, when, if water
is present, the fluctuation is easily perceived. It is caused by any
exposure or food that will produce the original inflammation.

TREATMENT.—Give five drops of the H.H., three times per day.


                                Founder

Sheep are occasionally foundered from similar causes which produce it in
other animals. It is manifested by the following symptoms: It walks
slowly; head depressed; has no sprightliness; poor appetite, but great
thirst. After a time this slowness of walking becomes a rigidity, so
that it requires great effort for the animal to lie down or get up
again. The appetite diminishes and thirst increases. In the more
advanced stages, the eyelids are swollen, the eyes more or less
inflamed, and the feet extremely hot; still farther advanced, there is
no appetite, feet are burning and hot, the animal is in so much pain
from movement that it will only walk to satisfy its raging thirst. It
drags itself along often on its knees rather than walk. It moans and
groans, there is severe fever, short breathing, and severe beating of
the flanks.

TREATMENT.—B.B., three drops, three times per day, or morning and night
if the case is not urgent. If there is heat or fever, the A.A., may be
given as an intermediate remedy.




                          CHAPTER V.—PART III.
                  DISEASES OF THE ORGANS OF GENERATION


                                Abortion

Abortion or premature birth may occur from three different causes:

1—ACCIDENTAL ABORTION.—Caused by a blow; strain; slipping on a wet
floor, etc.

2—ENZOOTIC ABORTION.—Due to some infectious disease of the mother.

3—CONTAGIOUS ABORTION.—A distinct disease which causes the death and
expulsion of the fetus or its expulsion in a feeble state prior to the
normal period.

SYMPTOMS OF THREATENED ABORTION.—In the first three months of pregnancy,
the appearance of a bloody, watery or mucous discharge from the vagina.
In the later months, uneasiness, swelling, heat and tenderness about the
udder; secretion of milk; and straining as if in labor.

TREATMENT OF THREATENED ABORTION.—Give fifteen drops of G.G., every six
hours, and the dose may be repeated two or three or more times should
the threatening symptoms continue after the first or even the second
dose has expended its action.

This interval should elapse between doses, as too rapid ones may even
defeat the object, by over-excitement of the system, while a single dose
often arrests an abortion if permitted to expand its action.

After a ewe has actually aborted, it is almost impossible to tell
whether it occurred from contagious abortion or from some other cause,
so the safe thing to do is to act as if it had been contagious abortion.

TREATMENT OF CONTAGIOUS ABORTION.—The fetus and membranes should be
burned. The premises occupied by the sick animal should be disinfected
as follows: Remove all bedding and dirt possible and spray all available
parts of barn with 3% formalin or 5% carbolic acid solution. Apply
whitewash containing 1 lb. chloride of lime to 3 gallons of whitewash,
scatter quicklime on floor and gutters.

The animal which has aborted should receive daily a vaginal irrigation
of two gallons of warm water containing 2% lysol until the vaginal
discharge stops. The external parts about the vagina, including the hips
and tail, should be washed thoroughly with soap and water and then with
the lysol solution as above, twice daily. This should also be done to
all exposed pregnant animals in the herd, being careful not to use the
same cloth, solution, bucket or attendant, for the well animals that was
used for the sick one. Give G.G., at intervals of six hours.


                      Inflammation of the Bearing

By this term is indicated a common affection of the ewe during the
lambing season, which is generally produced by injuries inflicted upon
the parts of generation in forcibly extracting the lamb from the mother.

TREATMENT.—The parts should be well washed with tepid water, and
VETERINARY OIL applied. A.A., should also be given internally, two or
three times a day; in some cases, alternated with I.I.


                    Garget—Inflammation of the Udder

Garget is a disease which prevails amongst ewes during the lambing
season. It arises generally from the action of cold and wet upon the
udder. Lying with the udder in contact with the cold, wet ground will
produce garget; also prevalence of wet and easterly winds.

The udder swells considerably, is excessively tender, and speedily
becomes hard and hot; the pulse rises; the appetite fails, and more or
less fever is present. The progress of the disorder is very rapid, and
often fatal; prompt treatment is consequently required.

TREATMENT.—The animal must be removed to a warm, sheltered situation,
free from wet and cold. The best remedy is the A.A. It is the more
demanded if the pulse is much disturbed and the patient feverish, and a
dose should be given three or four times a day. The lamb must be allowed
to suck, or the udder must be otherwise emptied of its contents. As the
fever abates, use the C.C., in alternation with the A.A.




                         CHAPTER VI.—PART III.
                    DISEASES OF LOCOMOTION AND SKIN


                               Rheumatism

Sheep, particularly aged sheep and lambs, are subject to rheumatism,
sometimes acute, sometimes chronic. They move stiffly, as if in pain,
look thin and miserable. The symptoms and treatment are the same as
those for the same disease in cattle (page 137). In old sheep, only
partial relief can be given; they should therefore be fed under shelter,
ready for slaughter; if left to graze, they may not feed at all. Lambs
should be sheltered and kept warm. B.B., is the proper and very useful
remedy, given daily.


                                Lameness

A sheep frequently manifests sudden lameness; when it does so, the foot
should be washed and examined. If there be a stone, thorn, or other
foreign substance in the cleft, it should be removed, and the wound
dressed with HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL. For other causes of lameness,
see sections on foot-rot, rheumatism, etc.


                                Foot-Rot

This disease usually results from foreign bodies, such as sand, gravel,
sticks, or dirt getting into the cleft of the foot, although it
sometimes appears to be contagious.

SYMPTOMS.—Lameness, swelling of the pastern, pain, etc.; matter then
forms, and unless it is let out, it will spread in all directions under
the foot and appear at the coronet; long, narrow ulcers remain, and
proud flesh springs up from the diseased places.

TREATMENT.—Examine the foot carefully; remove all dirt or other foreign
matter; then foment the foot, night and morning with hot water for an
hour, and then apply a turnip or bran poultice; the hoof should be pared
down, and all the dead parts, or those likely to interfere with the
escape of matter, cut away; afterwards apply the VETERINARY OIL on a
piece of cloth, bandaged to the foot, to keep it in place and prevent
dirt or other matter getting into the sore. If the parts are healthy,
the tar and tallow application (equal parts) is very servicable. The
hoof will then begin to grow, during which care must be taken to prevent
dirt lodging in the wound and causing fresh irritation. A dose of the
I.I., every morning, and of J.K., every night, will aid the process.


                                  Pock

This disease which attacks the same animal but once in life, and by
preference the young ones of the flock, is one which sometimes occasions
fearful ravages among sheep. It has its regular stages, like the
small-pox, and may be mild or malignant.

SYMPTOMS.—In the mild form, the animal is for two or three days sad and
dejected; then, on different parts, more particularly on the inner
surface of the fore-feet and around the mouth, small red spots appear,
whose center is occupied by a pimple, terminating in a white point. This
stage of eruption is attended with feverish shiverings, heat, especially
of the ears and nose; redness of the eyes and inner mouth; the animal is
melancholy; head down; feet close together; lameness, especially of hind
parts; no appetite or cud. The greater the number of pustules; the worse
the disease. The body is hot; breathing short; a clear mucous flows from
the mouth; the parts occupied with pimples, especially the head, swell
so that the animal cannot open its eyes or mouth; the fever continues;
the pustules enlarge, and are filled with fluid, first thin, and then
becoming thick, yellow and purulent. On the thirteenth day the pustules
begin to dry up, fever abates, pus hardens in the pustules, becomes
yellow, then darker, flatten, become scabs, and by degrees fall off,
leaving a dry scar behind. The drying stage lasts from five to seven
days.

Sometimes this disease assumes a malignant form, in which the pock are
very numerous, running together; the symptoms violent, irregular, and
the pock soon becomes dark-colored. The pustules run together, forming
extensive ulcers beneath the wool, frequently destroying the eyes and
entire pieces of the lips and face.

TREATMENT.—During the feverish stage, for the first five or six days,
give the A.A., five drops, four times per day. Then give the I.I., the
same dose morning and night, until the animal is well. This I.I., given
to the well sheep, will so act as to either prevent their having it at
all, or only in a very mild form. The sound and diseased, or suspected
sheep, should be separated, as the disease is very contagious, and
easily communicated.

If, however, the disease has appeared in a flock with some severity,
inoculation is best, quickest and safest. This may be done on the
forearm or other part, with matter from a fresh pock, merely dipping the
lancet in it and inserting it just beneath the skin, not so as to cause
the blood to flow, or it may wash it out. The advantage is, that all
have it lightly, and get over it in three weeks, otherwise the flock may
be six months having it; and not one per cent of inoculated animals will
die. During the disease they should not be kept too warm or be over-fed.


                                 Gadfly

The gadfly of the sheep (_œstrus ovus_), allied to the gadfly of cattle
(_œstrus bovinus_), is the plague of the flocks in August and September,
as the other is of the herds; but it chooses a different place for the
deposition of its eggs. The locality selected is the alœ, or flaps of
the nostrils of the healthiest and finest sheep of the flock, while they
are sleeping in the pasture. There the eggs, warm and moist, are
speedily hatched. Thence the larvæ ascending the nasal cavity, travel to
the frontal sinuses, where they remain, living on the mucous secreted
there, until their metamorphosis. During their course upward they
irritate the delicate membrane with their hooklets; and when then return
from their hiding place for expulsion from the nostrils in the following
spring, the irritation is renewed. The irritation, and consequent
inflammation, pain and sense of dizziness, drive the sheep to
distraction. The animal stamps, throws up his head, sneezes violently,
and repeats the expulsive effort until the larvæ come away with a large
quantity of mucous. The number of larvæ is usually not large; but when
it is considerable, the inflammation may turn to gangrene and cause
death. After expulsion, the larvæ bury themselves in the ground, assume
the pupa state, in two or three months come out as gadflies, and again
torment the sheep.

The treatment of this affection by means of powders blown up the
nostrils, is often as irritating and injurious as the presence of the
larvæ. I.J., should be given internally. The inhalation of fumes of
sulphur will cause sneezing; and if the larvæ be not already dead, they
should be destroyed.


                                  Fly

Sheep that are wounded by butting each other, or any other cause, that
have sores, that are dirty about the tail and quarters, are attacked by
a large blow-fly, which deposits its eggs in the wound or putrescence.
It is during the summer, in sultry weather and after rain that the fly
is the most troublesome. After a while the eggs are hatched, and the
maggots burrow in the flesh of the animal. Their presence is indicated
by local swelling, pain and dejection, and ultimate debility of the
animal. If the maggots are not promptly destroyed and the wound kept
clean, suppuration, deep ulcerations and death ensue. Mercurial
applications poison the sheep as well as the maggots. The best treatment
is to remove the maggots and keep the wounds clean, and apply HUMPHREYS’
VETERINARY OIL or a 2% lysol solution.




                         CHAPTER VII.—PART III.
                        SCAB, TICKS AND DIPPING


Sheep are infested with two kinds of external parasites. (1) The sheep
tick, which is a wingless fly, less than a quarter of an inch long, and,
(2) the acarus which causes scab; of these there are several different
species, but since the symptoms are much the same and the treatment
exactly the same in all cases it is hardly worth while to differentiate
between them.


                                Dipping

Dipping is now the accepted form of treatment for external parasites of
any kind.

There are three objects sought for in dipping; (1) the removal of
external parasites; (2) improving the condition of the skin; (3)
increasing growth in the wool; of course the first is the most
important.

Dips may be divided into two classes according to their origin viz.,
proprietary dips and non-proprietary dips.

A proprietary dip is one which is put up in packages and sold as a dip
and usually requires little handling to be ready for use.

A non-proprietary dip is one which the farmer makes up himself from
articles which he buys as crude drugs. This is usually cheaper, but
requires more handling in preparing it for use.

To-day, most, if not all proprietary dips on the market have been
approved by the Dep’t of Agriculture, and are about as effective as the
non-proprietary dips. The principal question is whether to pay a little
more and save the labor of preparing the dip, or pay less and do the
work yourself.

All dips come under one of five classes, according to the basic elements
used; (1) Tobacco and Sulphur; (2) Lime and Sulphur; (3) Coal tar; (4)
Carbolic acid; and (5) Arsenic.

The tobacco and sulphur dip is very much used and is highly recommended
by the Dep’t of Agriculture. It is prepared as follows: For every 100
gallons of dip required, use 21 pounds of tobacco leaves and 16 pounds
of flowers of sulphur. Soak the leaves in cold or luke-warm water for 24
hours in a covered vessel. Bring the water to a boil and then remove
from the fire. Allow to draw for not less than one hour or preferably
over night. Then strain and press out all the tobacco juice. Mix the
flowers of sulphur in water so as to make a thin paste, and pour this
into the tobacco solution, stirring to keep the sulphur from settling;
add water if necessary to make 100 gallons. Heat to about 100 degrees F.
for use, but be careful not to heat above 110 as the nicotine would
evaporate.

The tobacco and sulphur dip is one of the best known. It is cheap,
effective and does not injure the wool. However it does not keep and
must be freshly prepared for every dipping.

The lime and sulphur dip is also a very good one and is the dip usually
recommended, or even sometimes required by the Dep’t of Agriculture.

It is prepared as follows: For 100 gallons of dip take 8 pounds of
unslaked lime and 24 pounds of flowers of sulphur. Place the lime in a
kettle and add enough water to make a paste; sift in the sulphur,
stirring so as to mix thoroughly. Then add 25 to 30 gallons of boiling
water, and boil for at least two hours, stirring both mixture and
sediment frequently. Boiling should be continued until the sulphur has
disappeared from the surface of the liquid; add water as necessary. Then
pour liquid and sediment into a barrel with a bunghole about 4 inches
from the bottom, and allow to settle for two or three hours, and run off
into dipping vat, and add water to make 100 gallons.

This is one of the cheapest and most effective dips, but does sometimes
injure the wool if it is long.

The coal tar dips are of two classes, known as creosote dips and cresol
dips. They are sometimes home made, but more often are proprietary. Of
these dips, the creosote dips are probably the best, for although both
are effective in destroying ticks and scabs, the creosote leaves the
wool in a clean, soft and pliable condition, while the cresol dip is
liable to leave it dry and harsh.

The carbolic and arsenical dips are losing favor with sheep raisers oh
account of their poisonous character and they are not highly recommended
by the Dep’t of Agriculture.

Sheep should always be dipped twice. The first dipping kills the mites,
but usually does not get the eggs, so they should be dipped again, about
ten days after the first dipping.

Sheep should remain in the dip for one minute, to destroy ticks, and two
minutes for scab, and the head should be plunged beneath the dip just
before leaving the tank, except where using carbolic or arsenical dips.

If sheep become infested with ticks or scab, they should be dipped
irrespective of the season of the year. Otherwise it is usual to dip
them shortly after shearing.

For large flocks of sheep, an elaborate dipping plant, with permanent
vat, cooking and heating apparatus, and herding and draining pens is
necessary, but for a few sheep on a general farm, a large tub will do
and the sheep can be lifted in and out of it onto a draining board which
will carry the drippings back into the vat.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                  “40”

                Induces Repose, and Natural, Refreshing

                                 SLEEP

Insomnia, Sleeplessness, Wakefulness, Restlessness and Nervousness.

Dr. Humphreys’ Number “40” Induces Repose, and Natural, Refreshing
Sleep.

No Narcotic, No Opiate, No Dope, No habit forming Drugs, Strictly
Homeopathic.

Number “Forty” at all Drug Stores, 30c., or sent prepaid on receipt of
price.

                 =Humphreys’ Homeopathic Medicine Co.=

                    =Corner William and Ann Streets=

                               =NEW YORK=




                                PART IV.
                          Diseases of the Dog




                               CHAPTER I.
                            GENERAL DISEASES


                               Distemper

This is one of the most common diseases of the dog, and one that leaves
in its train often very serious results. The earlier symptoms are very
insidious. There is dullness; loss of appetite, flesh and strength may
be remarked, while purging and vomiting are not uncommon. To this are
added a short, husky cough, watery eyes, increased redness of the
vessels of the eye, sensibility of the eye to light, increased frequency
of the pulse. As the disease advances, the animal shivers with the cold,
dislikes to be disturbed, seeks warmth, and courts solitude; the bowels
are confined; the membrane of the eye covered with a fine net-work of
bright red vessels; a thick discharge of matter flows from the eyes; the
nostrils are covered with a glassy yellowish fluid; the cough is
increased in frequency, and comes on in fits, which terminates in the
discharge of a yellow, frothy fluid from the stomach; the skin is hot.
Often with red spots on the under side of the body and between the
thighs.

A later stage is marked by an increase of all the foregoing symptoms.
The body wastes, the shivering is constant, the eyes are filled with a
thick matter, which glues the eyelids together in the morning, tenacious
matter clogs the nostrils and obstructs the breathing. This causes much
uneasiness and frequent but unsuccessful attempts to overcome the cause
of annoyance. The discharge from the nostrils becomes bloody and
offensive; the breath is fetid; the lips are covered with ulcers; short
cries express pain; and the animal, becoming weaker and worse in every
respect, at last dies, a severe diarrhea being the usual harbinger of
that end.

Distemper frequently results in chorea, or St. Vitus’ dance, paralysis,
disease of the brain, ulcers on the eyes and opacity, inflammation of
the lungs, or in numerous other ailments.

TREATMENT.—The earlier stages, before the discharge is established, are
best controlled by the A. A., of which give a dose of three or five
drops, according to the size of the dog, morning, noon and night.

After the catarrhal stage has come on, give three or five drops of the
C. C., four times per day. This will, in general, carry the animal
safely and speedily through this ordeal. Should other diseases declare
themselves, they should be treated accordingly.

Should a general or partial paralysis occur, or inability to use one or
several limbs, the J. K., should be given, three or five drops, three
times per day, until recovered. (See paralysis.)

ACCESSORY MEASURES.—A nutritious and easily digested diet is of great
importance in this disease, such as—milk, bouillon, soup, scraped raw
meat and beef tea. If much diarrhea, boiled milk. If great loss of
strength or appetite, alcoholic stimulants may be added to the milk or
soup.


                      Simple or Inflammatory Fever

Is known by a fever, attended with increased heat of the whole body, and
with a quick, strong, decided pulse. It attacks dogs of all breeds and
ages, but most frequently those from one year to three years old.

CAUSES.—Sudden changes from heat to cold; jumping into cold water after
being very much heated from running; excitement from various causes.
Fever is accompanied with some degree of inflammation, however it may be
occasioned.

SYMPTOMS.—The fever comes on with a dislike to move, and with a drowsy
appearance, soon followed by great restlessness; constant getting up,
turning round, and lying down again; great thirst; hard, frequent pulse;
hurried breathing; red, swollen, watery eyes; burning heat of the whole
body; dry, parched nose; intensely hot mouth; as the disease progresses
the restlessness increases, and the dog stares, and frequently becomes
unconscious.

TREATMENT.—Give A. A., from one to three drops, according to the size of
the dog, every two hours at first, and as the patient mends, a dose four
times per day; and at the last, a dose of J. K., morning and night.


                Rheumatism—Chest Founder—Kennel Lameness

DEFINITION.—An affection of the muscles and joints accompanied with
stiffness and tenderness. More often of the chest, loins or back, but
may occur anywhere.

CAUSES.—Sudden exposure to cold and damp; going into water after running
fast; lying in a cold, wet kennel; violent exercise. It chiefly attacks
sporting dogs and house dogs.

SYMPTOMS.—Stiffness in the fore legs and shoulders; stiffness of back,
neck, and loins, animal cannot go up or down stairs easily, howls when
fore paws are lifted from the ground; unusual firmness and tenderness of
the muscles of the chest when pressed; swelling at the knees, with heat
and tenderness; tenderness at the back of the shoulder or the ribs;
accelerated breathing; impaired appetite; dry and hot nose. The animal
often limps with one paw, trails it, or holds it up as he goes along,
and howls when he puts it to the ground.

TREATMENT.—Give, at first, and more especially if there is heat or
fever, A. A., a dose every three or four hours, and later, if the
lameness and stiffness is considerable, give B. B., in alternation with
the A. A., at similar intervals. For simple rheumatic stiffness, give B.
B., morning and night. Dose, one to three drops, according to the size
of dog.

ACCESSORY MEASURES.—The animal must be kept warm and dry, and protected
from the inclemency of the weather. No meat of any kind should be given.


                                 Dropsy

Dropsy is a morbid accumulation of watery fluid confined to certain
parts of the body, or affecting the cellular tissue; the latter form,
called ANASARCA, is very rarely seen in the dog. The most common forms
are: water in the cavity of the chest, HYDROTHORAX; and water in the
abdomen, ASCITES.

CAUSES.—General Debility, brought on by want of food; diarrhea suddenly
checked; damp lodgings. It may follow various diseases, such as
inflammation of the lungs, or retroceding skin disorders; or be caused
by a diseased state of the mesenteric glands, or of the liver.

SYMPTOMS.—Ascites is accompanied by enlargement of the abdomen; the
water is sometimes collected in the abdominal cavity; at other times it
is between the skin and the peritoneum; in the former case there is not
that tense feeling which characterizes the latter. The presence of water
may be ascertained by resting one hand on one side of the abdomen and
striking the other side, when _fluctuation_ will be felt. WATER IN THE
CHEST is accompanied by oppressed breathing and cough; both symptoms are
aggravated by lying down. In either form of the disease there is loss of
appetite, disinclination to move, the urine is passed in small
quantities, the dog loses flesh and becomes weak.

TREATMENT.—H. H., by increasing the action of the kidneys, is often
efficient, a dose once in three hours. If not efficient, alternate I.
I., with the H. H., at the same intervals.


                                Abscess

DEFINITION.—A collection of matter, generally appearing between the skin
and the cellular tissue—occasionally close to the joint, and rarely (in
the dog) upon some internal organ. It may appear on any part of the
body.

CAUSES.—Injuries are the chief causes of abscesses in the dog, but they
sometimes appear from weakness after certain diseases, especially
distemper. When internal abscesses form, they are due to too great care,
too high feeding, or want of sufficient exercise.

SYMPTOMS.—A swelling appears, which is hot, painful and inflamed; it
increases in size, and finally bursts, when the matter is discharged. In
other cases there is but little heat or tenderness, and the swelling
increases slowly, and is occasionally hardened. If hardening takes
place, instead of suppuration, there is usually a sub-cutaneous fungoid
growth.

TREATMENT.—The I. I., is the remedy for such forms of disease, and may
be given, a dose of from one to three drops, according to the size of
the dog, three or four times per day.

ACCESSORY TREATMENT.—If an abscess appears to be forming, the part
should be narrowly examined to ascertain if there has been any injury
from a thorn, etc. If anything is found, it must be at once carefully
removed, and HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL or VETERINARY OIL applied to
the part. This, if attended to in time, will often prevent the formation
of the abscess. But if the swelling continue, and it is certain that pus
is forming, it will be hastened by fomenting the part with warm water,
three or four times a day; if the swelling has increased in size and
becomes softer, but does not break, it will be necessary to open it with
a lancet or sharp pen-knife.


                                 Tumors

DEFINITION.—A deposit or growth of diseased structure confined to the
part where it first appears. The tumors generally seen on the dog are of
two kinds—(1) indurated, or hard; and (2) encysted, or enclosed in a sac
or bag. They are seldom painful, unless considerable pressure be used;
as a rule they are movable, and their extent can easily be determined.
_Encysted tumors_ are the most common; they vary in size, from that of a
nut to that of a pint measure. They are sacs or small bladders filled
with matter, smooth and soft, devoid of inflammation, and lie close
under the skin. At times their formation is very slow; this is generally
the case when they are due to constitutional causes, a fact which can
generally be clearly ascertained.


                             LACTEAL TUMORS

Tumors sometimes form in the teat when there is obstruction in its
canal; or when the milk is dried up too soon or too quickly after
suckling. They appear in different parts of the gland, as small,
movable, hard bodies; increase in size; cause great inconvenience to the
animal; and form an eyesore to its owner. If their progress be not
arrested, they may ulcerate; or encysted tumors may form, which, if
injured by dragging along the ground, may have a similar issue.

CAUSES.—Bruises; wounds; constitutional tendency; diseased condition of
the secreting glands.

TREATMENT.—Hard tumors are best excised as soon as they appear. The
operation is simple, and the wound will generally soon close up if left
to the care of the dog, and after a time will scarcely be seen.

Encysted tumors are also best removed by excision. They may also be
removed by tapping for the extraction of the fluid, and the subsequent
injection of iodine. Should they become compound, they must be excised.
On the other hand, when it is known that they have been caused by an
injury, they will sometimes disappear by the use of HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL
WITCH HAZEL, internally and externally.


                                 Cancer

All tumors are not cancers, but in certain constitutions, inflammation,
indurated and encysted tumors may degenerate into cancerous growths. The
cancerous tumor is at first small, hard, knotted and irregular in form;
it then grows larger, and is attached to the skin; this inflames and
ulcerates; and thus the cancer appears on the surface. Its edges are
irregular red or purple, and indurated; it is attended with considerable
pain and a most disgusting discharge.

TREATMENT.—If in good health the tumor may be excised while the dog is
under chloroform. But the cancer will return. If fully established, the
animal should be put out of its misery. The best application is
HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL, and the best internal treatment is the I.I.,
a dose two or three times per day.


                              Black Tongue

During the last few years a disease has been quite prevalent in the
south which has been called “Black Tongue” whether this is a distinct
disease or merely the symptom of some other disease is as yet not known.

The principal symptoms are congestion of the tongue and mouth which
causes the black color, this usually leads to ulceration of the mouth
and the ulceration frequently extends so as to involve the entire
digestive tract. There is great weakness and emaciation with death in a
few days. Very few animals recover. Besides these symptoms many others
have been reported but they vary so much in the different cases that
they have caused great doubt as to “Black Tongue” being a distinct
disease. The symptoms given might be Dumb Rabies, page 225; Canker of
the Mouth, page 237; Hook Worm, page 243; or Sore Throat, page 232.

In cases of so called “Black Tongue” we would advise comparing the
symptoms with those of the above diseases.




                          CHAPTER II.—PART IV.
                DISEASES OF THE HEAD AND NERVOUS SYSTEM


                                Apoplexy

DEFINITION.—A sudden, partial or complete loss of consciousness and
power of motion, occasioned by determination of blood to the head.

CAUSES.—Pressure on the brain, from a congested state of the
blood-vessels. Fat pet dogs are more subject to an attack than dogs
moderately fed and allowed plenty of exercise.

SYMPTOMS.—Staggering walk, drowsiness, twitching of the muscles of the
face and limbs; these are premonitary symptoms of an attack; or the fit
may be sudden, when the dog falls down without power of movement, with
loud and irregular breathing, and appears to be dying, but generally,
after three or four hours, he gradually recovers.

TREATMENT.—The A.A., is the proper remedy, and may be given for the
premonitions of an attack, a dose morning and night. If he has had the
fit, give a dose at once, and repeat it again after two or three hours,
and then morning and night for a time, to prevent a relapse. Dose, one
to three drops, according to the size of the dog.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—Wherever the fit occurs, if possible, let the dog
remain, and apply cold water to the head with sponge. After recovery
takes place, care must be taken as to diet, only milk or oatmeal and
water should be given for a day or two.


                            Palsy, Paralysis

This is not an unfrequent affection in the dog, especially those that
are well fed, as pet dogs. It arises from disease of the brain or spinal
cord, and is sometimes also the result of disease of the bowels or
stomach.

SYMPTOMS.—It may occur in one side or part of the animal, and is most
frequent in the hind legs, which appear as if the animal had no power
over them; he staggers, falls, or lies on the ground, dragging his hind
legs after him, unable to stand upon them.

TREATMENT.—Give the J.K., two to five drops, according to the size of
the dog, three times per day.

In case it comes on suddenly in well fed dogs, from an over-feed or
gorging the animal, give a spoonful of castor oil and an injection of
warm soap and water, followed with the prescription above.


                           Epilepsy, or Fits

The dog is occasionally subject to true epilepsy, and not unfrequently
to fits or convulsions arising from transient causes; such as teething
in puppies, worms, want of exercise, and then too violent exercise. They
are liable, also, to come on during distemper, or after it, or from
disease of the brain. Small pet dogs are more subject to fits than
others, as their nervous system is more excitable and their lives more
artificial.

SYMPTOMS.—The fit generally comes on suddenly, the animal staggers,
falls down, remains lying for an instant, and then is violently
convulsed; the legs become stiff, the face distorted, the eyes roll
about, the tongue is thrust out, the jaws nearly closed or firmly
clenched. The convulsion becomes gradually less, and after some twitches
they cease, and the animal in a short time appears well again.

In true epilepsy the fits recur again at diminishing intervals, and
excitements may easily reproduce them.

TREATMENT.—Give on an attack, from whatever cause, from two to five
drops, according to the size of the animal, of the A.A., and repeat it
once after the paroxysm is over. This will be sufficient for fits
arising from any transient cause; but if the dog is subject to them, he
must have J.K., alternately with A.A., a dose every day or two, and
continued for some time.


                        Chorea, St. Vitus’ Dance

This is a frequent result of severe distemper, especially in the case of
young dogs, intestinal worms, disorders of the stomach or a weak and
anemic condition seem to predispose to this disease.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease manifests itself by twitches, or involuntary jerks
of various parts, as the leg, shoulder, face, neck, or even eyelids.
Sometimes it is confined to a single limb or two, or the whole body may
be affected. The animal has no control over them, and they are
manifested sometimes during sleep. He wastes, eats and sleeps badly, and
may become palsied; at last he becomes incapable of any service,
staggers, has convulsions, and is at last worn out.

TREATMENT.—Give the A.A., each morning, and J.K., each night, two to
five drops, according to the size of the animal, and follow the
treatment perseveringly.

ACCESSORY MEASURES.—Fresh air and fattening food such as—rich milk,
broth, oatmeal, meat once a day.


                         Rabies, Canine Madness

Much has been said upon the subject of _Rabies_, or _Canine Madness_,
and from the general horror in which the disease is justly held, some
consideration of it is proper, even if we do not possess the means of
cure. It is an acute disease, communicable from one animal to another
and from them to man. Occurring among men it is known as hydrophobia.
Its origin is unknown, but it is supposed to have originated from the
skunk. Formerly it was very common among the wolves and skunks of the
western plains. The virus affects the nervous system of the animal. It
is found in some of the secretions, chiefly in the salivary glands. The
disease is communicated only by the saliva of affected animals, usually
by biting. The disease may break out in from a few days to a few months
after the animal has been bitten; the average time is about twenty-five
days. Two principal forms of this disease have been distinguished;
rabies proper, and dumb rabies.

SYMPTOMS OF RABIES PROPER.—First change noticed is in the dog’s gait in
walking, either more lively and irritable than usual, or more dull and
sad; peculiar restlessness; does not remain in one place; often quits
his home and roams to a distance; he recognizes and obeys his master at
the commencement, and even through the entire disease; generally no
appetite from the commencement; some will take soup, but never solid
food; they often, however, devour strange things, as wood, leather,
straw, or even filth; they drink in all stages of the disease, as long
as they can swallow; there is always a peculiar change of voice, more
shrill or more grave, always slightly hoarse and disagreeable; the bark
is peculiar, not in distinct emissions, as in health, but an emission of
voice ending in a howl; the desire to bite is not constant, but comes
occasionally in fits, and varying degrees; during the fits he bites
everything, cats, other dogs, human beings, even his own master, or
inanimate objects, and frequently snaps at the air. At first he is but
little changed in appearance; but soon the eyes become red; they open
and shut alternately; later, they are dull, as if covered with dust;
rapid emaciation; he becomes, finally, very weak, and drags his hind
quarters, while at first he is strong, carries his tail as usual, and
differs not in gait from a healthy dog.

Dumb Rabies is manifested by loss of appetite, drink, voice, as in the
first instance, modified thus: The lower jaw droops, apparently
paralyzed from the commencement; he cannot swallow any liquid; saliva
constantly flows from his mouth; the tongue often hangs from between the
teeth; he bites less than in the first form; still, as there are times,
when irritated, that he may close his mouth, the danger from biting is
the same.

There are some popular errors, which are corrected by the following
statements, thus: Dogs may become mad at any season of the year. Female
and altered dogs may become mad by communication, though the disease
originates, probably, with entire animals. Mad dogs drink in all stages
of the disease, if the soreness of the throat, or paralysis of the jaws,
or flow of saliva does not prevent them; they have even been known to
swim in water. Mad dogs do not always carry the tail between the legs,
but otherwise, during the commencement of the disease; it is however,
common in many other diseases, and in all dogs when pursued or
frightened. Mad dogs do not always run in a straight line, unless
pursued; they change their direction like other dogs, and run to objects
which attract them. Other dogs do not avoid them, but if a stranger, it
will be attacked by well dogs. Sound animals have no repugnance to the
saliva of a mad dog, but will even eat meat which is covered with it.

TREATMENT.—All the means hitherto discovered to arrest the disease have
proved unreliable. BELLADONNA and the A.A., may do something, and had
best be administered in all doubtful cases: but if an animal is
indisputably rabid, it should be killed at once. The excision of the
gland or ligament under the tongue is only mutilating the animal to no
purpose.

If a dog is suspected, or has been bitten, or exposed to contagion, give
him the A.A., three or four drops, according to his size, three times
per day, and inject a dose of the same medicine into the wound at the
same time. Only a small proportion of the animals or persons bitten by
animals supposed to be rabid ever become mad.




                         CHAPTER III.—PART IV.
                 DISEASES OF THE EYES, EARS, NOSE, ETC.


                  Inflammation of the Eye, Ophthalmia

It may arise from a variety of causes, such as congestion of the brain;
exposure to heat and cold; over-exertion; blows or other injuries;
over-salted food, infection, foreign bodies, etc.

SYMPTOMS.—The white of the eye is covered with red streaks; the clear
portion in front (pupil) is dim; water runs down the face; the light
cannot be endured and the eyelid is closed. An ulcer may appear
afterwards in the front of the eye, and it may go on until it penetrates
through the outer coating of the eye (cornea), and the fluids of the eye
thus escape. In some cases proud flesh springs up from these ulcers.

TREATMENT.—The A.A., should be given, a dose of two drops only, two or
three times per day. This in general will be sufficient for all forms of
ophthalmia; but if the case is of some standing, or if ulcers or
degenerations have taken place, two drops of I.I., may be given every
night, and the A.A., in the morning.

A wash of HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, diluted one-half with soft
water, will promptly relieve.


                        Amaurosis, Gutta Serena

This disease consists in entire or partial loss of vision in consequence
of paralysis of the optic nerve, or interruption of its communication
with the brain. Injuries of the head, or ball of the eye, or some
disease of the brain, are the usual causes. The dog walks cautiously,
head elevated, the eye has a peculiar glassy appearance, and the pupil
does not dilate and contract when light is brought near or removed from
the eye.

But little can be done for these cases. In the earlier stages a dose of
the A.A., may possibly arrest its progress, but generally it is
incurable in man or beast.


                                Cataract

Opacity of the crystalline lens, or of its capsule, or both, prevents
the transmission of light, and thus causes blindness. One or both eyes
may be affected; old dogs generally suffer in both. The causes are the
same as those which lead to cataract in the horse; and to the section
thereon reference should be made. But little can be done by way of
medicine; A.A., will sometimes relieve.


                               Pterygium

This disease, which consists in a thickened state of the cellular tissue
of the conjunctiva, extending from the inner angle of the eye towards
the cornea, is not uncommon in dogs, both old and young. In pups it is
often cured by the mother’s licking the eye; in old dogs it proves
intractable. It sometimes follows ophthalmia.

TREATMENT.—You may give daily a dose, one to three drops, of A.A., with
decided benefit.


                         Eczema of the Eyelids

In this affection small pustules appear on the edges of the lids at the
roots of the lashes; presently they break, emit matter, which drys into
crusts, mats the hair, and glues the lids together. If not arrested, the
ulceration extends and destroys the bulbs of the hair, and with them the
eyelashes.

TREATMENT.—The eyelashes should be clipped off close to the eyelids; the
parts carefully washed with a sponge and diluted HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH
HAZEL, morning and night, to prevent agglutination. When crusts have
formed they can be best softened and removed by fomentations with warm
water. Care should be taken not to drag away the purulent matter with
force. Give I.I., morning and night.


                          Fistula Lachrymalis

The Lachrymal canals, which originate from the internal angle of the
eye, convey the tears into the lachrymal sac, an oval bag, which is a
receptacle for tears. It is situated near the angle, and constitutes the
upper extremity of the nasal duct. If this duct be obstructed, the tears
flow over on the cheek and a small tumor forms in the sac. This is
followed by inflammation, suppuration, and the formation of an abscess,
which bursts externally and leaves a fistulous opening, through which
tears flow from the sac on to the cheek.

TREATMENT.—Sponge the eye with warm water, and give A.A., morning and
night, if the eye or lids are inflamed, or the I.I., if no manifest
inflammation is present.


                           Canker in the Ear

This disease consists of an inflammation of the internal ear, followed
by ulceration and the formation of matter. It is usually the consequence
of some injury, but may also result from excess of food and want of
exercise, or from frequent and sudden exposure, as in case of dogs
taught to go in the water, among whom it is quite common; it may also
come from parasites; fat dogs are more subject to it than others.

SYMPTOMS.—The dog manifests pain by shaking his head, scratching his
ears, or whining. The internal ear looks red, afterwards may ulcerate; a
discharge occurs, and a blackish fluid will be found at the bottom of
the ear, sometimes in considerable quantity; there is high fever, which,
with the continuance of the discharge, may wear out the dog.

TREATMENT.—Wash the ear frequently with warm water, to carefully remove
the discharge; afterwards apply some diluted MARVEL WITCH HAZEL.

Give A.A., three or four drops, alternately with I.I. The same dose four
times per day; it may be successful.


                                Deafness

CAUSES.—It is sometimes a sequel of distemper, fever, or inflammation of
the brain; it is also due to general debility, an accumulation of
hardened wax, old age and canker.

TREATMENT.—Examination must be made to ascertain if it is due to the
impaction of hard wax; if so, a little warm water and soap may be
injected twice a day; after a few days the wax will most likely be
softened sufficiently to allow of its removal. If the disorder follows
distemper, C.C., should be given; if fever or inflammation of the brain,
A.A.; if canker, also the C.C., a dose morning and night.


                   Serous Cyst or Abscess of the Ears

This affection of the ear generally arises from some injury, which is
followed by an accumulation of a pale, straw-colored fluid between the
outside and inside skin of the ear. Sometimes it increases slowly, at
others rapidly, so much so that in a few days there will be a quarter of
a pint deposited. The best thing is to open the swelling at once with a
lancet, at the lowest part of the inside of the ear, and press out all
the fluid. If this can be done effectually, adhesion of the two skins
takes place without anything else being necessary. But if the discharge
has been caused by a severe blow, it may continue for a week or two.
Occasionally, if the punctured place is not kept open, the fluid
accumulates a second and third time; if such should be the case, it will
be advisable to inject a little warm water, and lay the ear in a vessel
containing warm water for five or ten minutes, once a day for several
days. Give I.I., also morning and night.


                            External Canker

External Canker is mostly found on the ears of dogs with short coats; it
comes generally on the outside of the ears, beginning at the tips, and
gradually extends down to the roots.

CAUSES.—Constitutional tendency; unsuitable food; want of cleanliness;
sudden disappearance of eczema.

TREATMENT.—I.I., is the proper remedy, giving once or twice per day.

The ears should be washed once a day with warm water and soap. After
they are dry, the following lotion should be applied with a sponge;
Glycerine one part, HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL two parts, to water
three parts.


                         Ulceration of the Nose

Ulcerations of the nose are not common in dogs, but they should not be
neglected, as they might injure or destroy the sense of smell. They
sometimes occur in old dogs, and emit a purulent, or sanious, and most
offensive discharge. This condition is attended with pain, noisy
breathing, attempts to sneeze, etc.

TREATMENT.—C.C., is the proper remedy, and may be given two or three
times per day.

The nostrils should be washed and syringed with tepid water, morning and
night.




                          CHAPTER IV.—PART IV.
                   DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY ORGANS


                           Angina—Sore Throat

DEFINITION.—Inflammatory swelling of the larynx and trachea.

CAUSES.—Exposure to sudden cold when heated; damp lodgings.

SYMPTOMS.—The first are generally sneezing, hoarse cough, ears and nose
alternately hot and cold, noisy breathing, caused by swelling of the
glands under the throat and jaw; difficulty of swallowing. The front of
the neck, especially about the larynx, is much swollen; when the
swelling is considerable, internally and externally, the breathing
sometimes becomes so much embarrassed that the animal dies of
suffocation.

TREATMENT.—Give A.A., a dose every hour at first, and then every two
hours, until relieved.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—The frequent application to the throat of cloths dipped
in hot water; cold water, frequently renewed, for the dog to lap; cold
milk and broth as diet.


                          Catarrh—Coryza—Cold

DEFINITION.—As a rule, coryza in the dog consists of inflammation of the
mucous membrane of the nose. It is most frequent among dogs that are
petted and kept in warm rooms. It may lead to bronchitis and other
diseases of the respiratory organs.

CAUSE.—Change of temperature, especially in spring, during the
prevalence of easterly winds.

SYMPTOMS.—Running from the nose and eyes; sneezing; diminished appetite;
accelerated breathing; dullness; heaviness; sleepiness.

TREATMENT.—C.C., is the proper remedy, a dose, one to three drops, three
or four times per day.

ACCESSORY TREATMENT.—It will facilitate the cure if the dog is kept in a
warm place for a day or two, not allowed to go out at all, and fed upon
milk or thin oatmeal gruel. He should also have plenty of water to
drink. The nose and eyes should be sponged with tepid water several
times a day.


                      Bronchitis—Acute and Chronic

DEFINITION.—Acute bronchitis is active inflammation of the membrane of
the air-tubes of the lungs. Chronic bronchitis more particularly affects
old dogs.

CAUSES.—Sudden changes of temperature; standing in the cold when heated;
cold draughts of air in the kennels, or wherever the dog is kept,
frequently cause bronchitis.

SYMPTOMS.—The first symptoms of acute bronchitis are generally those of
common cold; shivering; short, hard cough; constant distressing cough,
at first dry, afterwards accompanied by a sticky mucous; feverish
symptoms; accelerated pulse and breathing; loss of appetite; dullness;
an anxious look depicted on the countenance. Auscultation detects a
wheezing sound, or rattling of mucous, in the trachea and bronchial
tubes. The nose is hot and dry at the commencement of the attack, but
becomes moist when the inflammatory stage is passed. Chronic bronchitis
consists of a cough during the winter months, which comes on after
changes in the temperature, and is attended with shortness of breath and
wheezing.

TREATMENT.—Give, at first, and during the feverish stage, a dose, of
A.A., one to three drops, according to the size of the dog. After the
more urgent symptoms have been relieved, E.E., may be given, in
alternation with the A.A.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—The dog should be kept in the house, and in one
temperature, as nearly as possible. A pail of boiling hot water may be
placed in the kennel from which the steam will evaporate and keep the
air moist; this will be found very beneficial. Milk, or bread and milk,
constitute the best diet; farinaceous food, but no meat; fresh supplies
of cold water. Meat broth may be given in cases of great debility and
old age.


                                 Asthma

This disease, which most nearly resembles broken wind in the horse, is
characterized by difficult breathing, with intervals of free
respiration.

CAUSES.—Close confinement, want of outdoor exercise, excessive feeding;
it is observed almost wholly among fat and petted dogs, from four to
seven years old.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease is insidious in its invasion; it begins with a
slight cough, which returns at irregular intervals, and is therefore
likely to escape observation. It, however, becomes more frequent and
troublesome; is harsh, dry and sonorous, and may give the mistaken
impression that there is a bone in the throat. It is then provoked by
every change of temperature, food or posture; becomes almost incessant;
disturbs sleep; produces nausea and sickness; but nothing is expelled
besides mucus from the respiratory passages, where its presence is a
cause of irritation. Meanwhile the breathing is affected, and is not
unfrequently very labored and painful. The digestion may be impaired;
the appetite slight or morbid; the breath offensive; the teeth covered
with tartar; the coat rough; the skin mangy. In some cases the dog is
worn down by the irritation of the cough; in others the pulmonary
congestion arrests respiration, and causes suffocation; or cardiac
difficulties cause accumulation of blood in the head, and consequent
convulsive fits. But the disorder generally ends in hydrothorax or
ascites—generally the latter. In these cases the body wastes, the
abdomen is enlarged, the legs swell, the coat is staring, the breathing
very laborious, till, ultimately, suffocation puts an end to the
animal’s existence.

TREATMENT.—If the disorder be treated judiciously in the early stage, it
is curable; but if it has continued for any length of time, only
palliation can be looked for. Give E.E., a dose, according to size of
dog, two or three times per day. For a fit of asthma or bad breathing,
give A.A., every hour. For old, bad cases, try I.I., three times per
day.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—Exercise should be regularly taken in the open air,
except when the weather is cold, or damp, or sultry. The food should be
of the best and most nutritious quality, given frequently, but in small
quantities at a time.


            Inflammation of the Chest, Pneumonia or Pleurisy

Inflammation of the chest usually involves both the pleura or lining
membrane of the chest, and the substance of the lungs, so that they may
be advantageously treated. It is usually the result of cold and exposure
after being heated; it may also be produced by wounds.

SYMPTOMS.—Shivering chill, followed by heat and thirst; the sides are
painful when pressed upon; stitches are observed; the dog sits upon his
haunches, with the fore legs separated from each other, and the head
held forward; the breath hot; cough short and painful; breathing
frequent, labored and heaving; pulse full and quick; tongue hangs out of
the mouth; eyes thrust forward and red; finally drowsiness, and death.
Sometimes the effusion of water in the chest is very abundant, when the
legs swell, and breathing becomes difficult, labored and suffocating.

TREATMENT.—Give first, three or five drops, according to the size of the
dog, of the A.A., and repeat the dose every two hours for the first
twenty-four hours. Then alternate the E.E. with the A.A., at intervals
of two or three hours.


                                 Cough

In most cases cough is symptomatic of disease, and often indicates the
commencement of some serious disorder of the respiratory organs, when it
should not be allowed to continue unheeded. Well fed dogs often have a
dry, searching cough, which, if they are old, degenerates into asthma.
Cough is sometimes consequent on obesity, when the amount of food should
be lessened, exercise taken, and J.K., administered. If it be caused by
the dog going into the water, or being washed with warm water in winter,
or being confined for some time in a low, damp situation, I.I., or E.E.,
are the remedies. Such a cough is generally harsh and hard, and
accompanied by vomiting of tough mucus. A dose two or three times per
day is sufficient.




                          CHAPTER V.—PART IV.
                    DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


                               Salivation

Mercury, in its various forms, is sometimes given to dogs by ignorant
persons, or by chemists and dog-fanciers, for some real or supposed
disease; or it is applied to them externally as an ointment for mange,
in either case resulting in salivation, with the following.—

SYMPTOMS.—Loss of appetite; sore, swollen gums, which are blueish,
easily bleed, and generally ulcerate; loosened teeth, which may even
fall out; constant dribbling of saliva from the mouth; offensive breath;
swelled glands; extreme weakness; hair falls off; and frequently
purging, attended with straining.

TREATMENT.—Give the A.A., a dose each morning and noon, and a
teaspoonful of HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL at night, especially if
there is ulceration of the mouth or throat. If not improved after three
or four days, substitute I.I., three or five drops, morning and night.


                          Canker in the Mouth

This is a very troublesome affection, and often difficult to cure;
indeed, if the disease be the result of a long continued local
irritation, or the dog be old, it is generally considered to be
incurable.

SYMPTOMS.—The gums are swollen, and discharge purulent, bloody,
offensive matter; “proud flesh” is formed; bleeding ensues; there is
difficulty in eating; appetite and condition are lost; emaciation and
exhaustion follow.

TREATMENT.—When the disease is of recent origin, or the dog is young and
generally healthy, the mouth should be washed out once a day for several
days, with a solution of HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, half water; and
give J.K., say three times per day, two to three drops, according to the
size of the dog. It is usually promptly efficacious.


                         Diseases of the Teeth

The teeth are more frequently affected in the dog than in other domestic
animals. This may be the result of a variety of causes, among which are
the following: Eating or gnawing bones, by means of which the teeth may
be broken or ground down to the quick; healthy, well fed dogs only pick
their bones; rich, sweetened food, which has an injurious effect upon
the teeth; mercury, frequently given to dogs, which produces salivation,
loosening, and eventually falling out of the teeth. Teaching dogs to
carry or chase hard substances, stones, etc., frequently results in
diseased teeth, as they are thus rubbed down to the gum, and the stump
produces much mischief.

SYMPTOMS.—If the dog has a bad breath, seems to be in pain when he eats,
does not thrive or manifest his usual spirit, the mouth should be
examined. One or more teeth will be found worn down to the gum; the fang
produces irritation, and may result in an abscess; the sides of the
mouth are raw and ulcerated, and saliva dribbles from it.

TREATMENT.—Extraction is the sole remedy for loose, irregular or decayed
teeth.


                              Indigestion

DEFINITION.—Imperfect transformation of food into a state suitable for
the nourishment of the body.

CAUSES.—Improper food, or food in too large quantities; want of
exercise.

SYMPTOMS.—Restlessness; partial loss of appetite; frequently attempts to
vomit, sometimes bringing up only froth; at other times a mixture of
froth and green fluid; foulness of breath; irregular action of the
bowels; distention of the body; lying out at full length and rolling
over; the appetite is vitiated or impaired.

TREATMENT.—Give the J.K., for indigestion, a dose, one to three drops,
according to the size of dog, once in two, three or four hours. Often a
dose night and morning is sufficient.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—Attention to diet and regular exercise go a long way
towards curing and preventing this disease.


                                Vomiting

It is such an easy matter for dogs to vomit that the least thing which
disagrees with the stomach occasions it. It is rarely of any
consequence, as it does not interfere with the health; but there are
some cases of continued vomiting, in which it is necessary to administer
medicine.

TREATMENT.—When vomiting takes place daily for several days, and soon
after eating, it will most likely be remedied by changing diet; if it
continues after the diet has been changed, give a dose of J.K., morning
and night. Should the dog be bloated or full of gas, a dose of F.F.,
will be curative.


                                 Colic

Colic is not unfrequent in the dog. It is often connected with
constipation, and may result from bad food, sudden change of food,
exposure to cold, or from worms. It is common in puppies.

SYMPTOMS.—The dog has sudden pain in the bowels; it comes on in fits, is
worse at one time than another. The dog is restless, frequently changing
his position; he extends himself and then draws himself in with arched
back, turns his head towards his sides, throws himself down, rolls
about, moans or whines when the pain is severe, with a short, rough
voice. There is rarely any fever in case of simple colic.

TREATMENT.—The F.F., should be given; a dose, from three to five drops,
according to the size of the dog, and repeated every half hour or hour,
as the urgency of the case demands.

Should it not promptly relieve, the A.A., or J.K., may be given
alternately with F.F.


                 Gastritis—Inflammation of the Stomach

CAUSES.—Drinking cold water when heated from running; damp kennels;
continued feeding with rich food; indigestion; poisons.

SYMPTOMS.—Great pain; the dog throws himself on the ground, kicks and
rolls; there is constant desire for cold water, but as soon as any food
or drink is swallowed, it is rejected; constant retching; dry and hot
nose; cold extremities; quick breathing; anxious countenance; lying on
the belly on the coldest ground the dog can find.

TREATMENT.—A.A., is the proper medicine. Give a dose as often as every
hour if in great distress, and at longer intervals as the patient
improves. From one to three drops, according to the size of dog.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—Nothing but cold water should be allowed till all the
symptoms have disappeared; even then great care must be exercised for
several days, as to the kind of food given; cold milk or oatmeal gruel
will then be suitable, in small quantities.

The treatment of gastritis produced by poisons consists in removing the
poison from the system and neutralizing its effect.


                  Enteritis—Inflammation of the Bowels

DEFINITION.—Inflammation of the bowels, either of their whole substance
or only the inside or lining membrane.

CAUSES.—Drinking cold water when heated; exposure of petted dogs to
cold; damp or sudden changes of weather; keeping the kennels of chained
dogs on a damp, sunless situation; too long continuance of animal food;
flatulent colic; obstruction of the bowels from hardened fæces, foreign
bodies, etc.

SYMPTOMS.—Violent pain, without cessation; great tenderness of the
abdomen, which is very hot; the pain is often so severe that the poor
animal throws himself violently down, howls, springs up again, walks
about for a few seconds, throws himself down again, rolls over and cries
out; these actions are repeated until relief is obtained, or, in fatal
cases, till a short time before death takes place. There is also
aversion of food, constant thirst, constipation, the excrement coming
away in small, hard pieces, during the first stage of the disease; the
evacuations afterwards become loose and bloody.

TREATMENT.—A. A., is the proper remedy, a dose of from one to three
drops, in a spoonful of water or milk, should be given, at first every
half hour, then, as he improves, every hour, and as improvement
progresses, at still longer intervals, until relief is obtained.
Sometimes interposing a dose of F. F., is beneficial, if there are
loose, bloody stools, or violent pain.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—Fomentations of hot water should be applied to the
body, and continued till the symptoms have abated; cold water given to
lap; milk and broth may be given when the severe symptoms have subsided.


                                Diarrhea

Excess of food, bad food, exposure to cold and wet, as well as a bilious
condition, may induce diarrhea in the dog. If slight it will cure
itself. It usually manifests itself by sickness, vomiting, thirst,
discharges more frequent and thinner than usual. If it continues, the
animal becomes thin, weak, does not eat his food, and his breath becomes
offensive.

TREATMENT.—The F. F., will be found effectual. Give three or four drops,
according to the size of the dog, three times per day.


                               Dysentery

SYMPTOMS.—Thirst, purging of fluid mixed with small pieces of dung,
attended with severe straining and pain; often the discharges are of
mucus mixed with blood. There is loss of strength and appetite, with
rapid wasting.

TREATMENT.—Give the F. F., two to five drops, every one, two or three
hours, according to the urgency of the case.


                     Constipation, or Bound Bowels

Constipation is more frequently observed than diarrhea in a dog. It may
be the result of a want of proper exercise, improper food, or some
disorder of the liver or other part of the digestive system. It is
manifested by frequent unavailing efforts to evacuate, attended with
groaning, trembling or other manifestations of pain.

TREATMENT.—Give J. K., three to five drops, according to size of animal,
three times per day.

Should this course not relieve, an injection of warm soap and water
should be given, and repeated, if necessary, until the result is
accomplished.


                                 Worms

The entire animal kingdom is subject to numerous parasites or entozoa.
These have their abode either upon the surface, or along the intestinal
tract, or within the cavities, or even in the more solid substances or
muscles of the body. They are found in all animals and fish—those in
apparent health as well as those that are sick—and part they play in the
economy of nature is confessedly obscure. It is generally conceded that
it is only in peculiar or morbid conditions, or under a course of diet
and regimen unfavorable to health, that they multiply or increase to
such an extent as to become of themselves a source of irritation and
disease. It is under these conditions that INTESTINAL WORMS become the
subject of medical treatment.

No animal is so subject or so frequently tormented by worms as the dog.
This is doubtless owing to his highly artificial life and the great
variety of food given him. Intestinal worms are of four varieties; the
first is the Ascarides or round worm, white or light yellow in color and
common in puppies. The second is the Oxyaris Vermicularis, known as the
pin or thread worm and inhabiting the lower bowel. The third is the
Tenia or tape worm. The fourth is the Uncinaria Trigonocephalus or hook
worm.

SYMPTOMS.—All worm symptoms are questionable, except finding them in the
discharges. Their existence may be inferred if the dog has a short coat,
bound bowels or purging, turns of griping, wasting or fits.

TREATMENT.—For the first two classes of worms there are two systems of
treatment. The first is to give a Vermifuge; this kills the worms and
expels them from the system, however, it has done nothing to relieve the
morbid conditions that allowed the worms to accumulate in the first
place and they will return and have to be expelled etc. The other system
is to remove the morbid conditions which allowed the worms to accumulate
and the system will then expel the worms of its own accord. This is
naturally a slower process than the first but its effects are much more
lasting. D. D. belongs to the latter class of remedies.

GIVE D. D., two to five drops, according to size of dog, two or three
times per day. Its continuance will not fail to eradicate them from the
system.

The TAPE WORM consists of a head not larger than a pin’s head, in which
there are four sucking cups and their armature; a neck, which is an inch
or more in length, very slender and without joints; and the body,
consisting of a long row of flat, ribbon like segments, each of which in
rectangular in shape and increasing in size towards the caudal
extremity. These segments have each the male and female organ, and at
the caudal extremity the ripe eggs; there may be several hundred of
these segments, each half or three-quarters of an inch in length, and
the entire animal measure several yards. From time to time, the lower
segments or joints as they are termed, ripen, and are pushed off, and
appear in the evacuations.

THE HOOK WORM or UNCINARIA TRIGONOCEPHALUS is a small thread like worm,
from one-quarter to three-quarters of an inch long, white, with a black
line down the body, the head has a bell shaped mouth provided with six
hook like teeth; by means of these hooks the worm buries its head in the
lining of the intestine from which it sucks blood. These worms are quite
prevalent in the Southern States also in Southern Europe and Asia. They
are found more frequently in packs of hunting dogs than in individual
house dogs.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease develops gradually with weakness and wasting
followed by colic and alternating constipation and diarrhea. A discharge
of bloody mucus from the nose and swelling of the limbs is
characteristic of the disease. Death follows at a considerable interval.

TREATMENT.—Both the Tape Worm and the Hook Worm are very tenacious
parasites and are not expelled by Homeopathic Remedies nor by the
ordinary Vermifuge. Oil of Chenipodium has lately come into prominence
as a Vermifuge for worms of all kinds; this is an American drug commonly
called “Worm Seed” and was used by the Indians before the days of
Columbus and later was very popular among the Southern “Mammies” for the
elimination of round worms. It has lately returned to favor particularly
for the treatment of Hook Worms.

The Oil can be obtained at any drug store, 16 drops is the dose for a
dog of 40 pounds or over, this should be reduced in proportion to the
weight of the dog. The dog should be starved for at least 12 hours,
preferably 24 hours; he should then receive three doses with intervals
of two hours between the doses. Two hours after the last dose give a
tablespoonful of castor oil with a teaspoonful of chloroform (reduce in
proportion to size of dog).

Be careful to give the medicine exactly according to the directions. A
Vermifuge is a drug that is strong enough to kill or paralize the worms
without killing or paralizing the animal; however too large a dose, or,
too short an interval between the doses, or, too many doses may kill or
paralize the animal as well as the worms.

If during the treatment the dog appears unusually depressed, stop the
medicine and give castor oil to move the bowels and strong hot coffee as
a stimulant.


                     Thread Worms (Filaria Immitis)

These thread worms inhabit principally the heart, lungs, and sometimes
the throat and air-passages of the dog. They are sometimes found in
bundles, slowly unrolling themselves when the part is cut open, or are
found stretched out along the surface.

The characteristic symptom is a peculiar cough exhibited by any
movement, especially after sleeping, ending in a violent effort to bring
up something, emaciation, difficult breathing. When affected, the dogs
run violently; they fall down, become stiff, insensible, and after a
time get up and renew the chase.


                    Gastro-Duodinal Catarrh—Jaundice

This disease is occasionally found in dogs, more particularly in fat
ones. It may be the result of excess of food and deficient exercise, or
exposure to cold or moisture.

SYMPTOMS.—The dog vomits, at first a yellow fluid which may afterward
become greenish and have streaks of blood in it, eats little and is
thirsty, the white of the eye, gums, lips and parts of the skin not
covered with hair are yellow; hence the name Jaundice or yellows. He is
sometimes hot, at others cold, the urine is dark and the dung clay
colored, is dull, sleepy, shrinks from notice and becomes thin. These
symptoms all increase until the dog becomes thin as a skeleton and at
last dies, quite worn out.

TREATMENT.—Give the A.A., alternately with J.K., a dose of three to five
drops, according to the size of the dog, every three or four hours, as
the urgency of the case may demand. Old cases of liver complaint simply
require a dose of J.K., morning and night.


                Foreign Bodies in the Esophagus—Choking

A dog sometimes swallows a bone or piece of gristle, which sticks in his
throat. He begins to cough, is restless, cannot swallow, puts his paw to
the side of his head as if to pull something away; the eyes are red and
prominent; mucus escapes from the mouth and nose.

TREATMENT.—The mouth should be opened as wide as possible, and warm
water poured in till the dog vomits, when the intruder may come away; or
it may be removed with a forceps. But if removal in this direction be
impracticable, an attempt may be made to push the foreign body into the
stomach with a piece of whalebone, cane or willow, protected at the end
with a piece of sponge dipped in oil. If this fails, it will be
necessary to open the esophagus. If this tube has been injured, two or
three drops of arnica should be given in water, twice a day. For several
days, milk or soup diet only should be given.




                          CHAPTER VI.—PART IV.
             DISEASES OF THE URINARY AND GENERATIVE SYSTEMS


                               Nephritis

DEFINITION.—Inflammation of the kidneys sometimes ending in an
alteration of the secretions. It is not a very common disease, but when
it occurs it is very dangerous.

CAUSES.—Exposure to cold and wet; seasoned food; over-exertion; strains;
injuries; the presence of calculus; the administration of cantharides
and turpentine in excessive doses, or as a result of infectious
diseases.

SYMPTOMS.—Tenderness of the loins; stiffness of the hind legs, which are
carried wide apart when moving; hot and dry mouth and nose; great
thirst; frequent turning of the head toward the flanks; the urine is
passed in small quantities, with straining, highly-colored, like blood,
or thick and glairy; bound bowels; feces hard and dry; sometimes
vomiting; the appetite is lost; there is disinclination to move, and
when the dog is obliged to stir the back is arched.

TREATMENT.—Give H.H., from one to three drops, according to the size of
the dog, once in three hours at first, and then at longer intervals as
the animal improves. A.A. may be sometimes called for as an intercurrent
remedy, or to give between doses of the H.H.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—Cloths wrung out of hot water and laid across the loins
will be beneficial; nothing but milk must be given for several days.


                 Inflammation of the Bladder, Cystitis

This disease, which is a very dangerous and painful one, may be caused
by stones in the bladder, injuries, fall upon the bladder when it is
full of water, or similar accidents. As a result of infectious diseases,
or diseases of the kidneys, also too long retention of urine in the
bladder (dogs kept in the house too long).

SYMPTOMS.—Hot, dry skin; pain in the back and flanks; thirst; no
appetite; restlessness and signs of pain; frequent attempts to pass
water, in which either one or only a few drops are passed at a time; the
water may be clear, or thick and mixed with blood.

TREATMENT.—Give first two or three doses of the A.A., at intervals of
two hours, then give the H.H., a dose of three or five drops, according
to the size of the dog, at intervals of two to three hours, until
entirely relieved.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—Liquid diet should be given such as milk or broth.


                            Gonorrhea, Gleet

This disease, which is essentially an inflammation of the urethra,
generally arises from taking the disease by connection with other
animals that have it, or from repeated acts of sexual connection, which
induces irritation, followed by a gleety, discharge; or it may arise in
a modified form from uncleanliness.

SYMPTOMS.—Discharge from the internal surface of the sheath and urethra,
or canal through which the water flows, consisting of matter having a
yellowish or greenish color, glueing together the parts or hair about
them; the surface looks red and angry, and is attended with swelling and
pain; there is frequent desire to pass water; sometimes the swelling and
pain are but slight.

TREATMENT.—Give the H.H., a dose of three or five drops, according to
the size of the dog, four times per day.

In old cases, a dose of the J.K., given nightly, will be of decided
benefit.


                         Inversion of the Womb

This sometimes occurs after parturition, either from disease of the
womb, or from straining to void the placenta. The treatment consists in
carefully washing the womb with tepid water, and then with the fingers
(oiled) returning it to its proper position. The womb in these cases is
turned inside out, so that what is the inside when in its proper
position becomes the outside when it protrudes from the vagina.
Therefore, to replace it, the pressure must be from the part furthest
from the vagina, and made with careful, gentle pressure. The replacement
is easily affected, especially if an assistant holds the bitch up by the
hind legs. After the organ is replaced, a little HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY
OIL may be applied or poured into the vagina, and a dose or two of A.A.
given. Afterwards, if there are symptoms of straining, the bitch must be
made to stand or walk about, and G.G., must be given.


                       Inflammation of the Teats

This generally comes on a few days after the bitch has pupped. At first
there will be found small lumps at the base of the teats, which are very
tender; the swelling soon increases, and extends all around the teats;
they then become very hot, and of a deep red color. The sucking of the
pups causes so much pain that the bitch refuses to allow it. When this
is the case, the inflammation soon extends over the whole udder, and if
it be not arrested, suppuration takes place, and an abscess forms at the
base of one or more of the teats.

TREATMENT.—Give A.A., a dose of one to three drops, once in say three
hours at first, then once in six hours, and bathe the teats in
HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL WITCH HAZEL or if cracked or very sore, apply
HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL, morning and night.




                         CHAPTER VII.—PART IV.
     DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND EXTREMITIES, AND MECHANICAL INJURIES


                         Eczema—Surfeit—Blotch

DEFINITION.—A non-contagious, vesicular disease of the skin, not
occasioned by the presence of parasites, but dependent on constitutional
predisposition. It is sometimes termed mange, but is distinguished from
that disease by the absence of _acari_. Foul mange is an aggravated form
of eczema.

CAUSES.—Hereditary constitution; insufficient exercise; gross diet; food
too spare or too full in quantity, or unwholesome in quality; close
kennel; dirty bedding, too hard or too luxurious a bed, etc. Flesh food
will produce it; so, also, will sleeping on barley straw.

SYMPTOMS.—The disease begins with irritation of the skin, which causes
the dog to be continually scratching; from inflamed patches a serous
fluid exudes, which mats the hair and forms scabs; these fall off
together, leaving the skin bare, inflamed, red, and discharging a thin,
watery fluid. This fluid dries in thin scales, which cause considerable
irritation. The scabs and scales are scratched and rubbed by the dog,
and are thus aggravated till pustular and vesicular eruptions give the
appearance of general ulceration. The patch usually occurs on the back,
at the root of the tail, outer surface of thighs or rump.

In other cases, in fat, over-fed animals, the skin is devoid of hair, is
greatly thickened (especially along the back or before the tail), and is
almost devoid of sensation. The dog is very foul, and smells very
offensively; the skin is wrinkled, chapped, cracked, ulcerated, emitting
disgusting serum or pus; thick, yellowish crusts are formed; and the dog
lies dull all day long, sleeping, licking, scratching, biting its sore
places, a disgusting object to look at.

The disease may be confined to certain parts, when it receives the name
of the part attacked. In sporting dogs there is frequently an eczematous
eruption between the toes and at the roots of the nails, which causes
redness, swelling and tenderness of the feet, together with lameness.

Puppies almost invariably inherit the disease when it has occurred on
one of the parents.

As it is a constitutional disease, its duration is uncertain, its cure
difficult, and its return probable.

TREATMENT.—In old cases, give the I.I., each morning, and the J.K., at
night, and anoint, once per day, the sore, rough or scabby places, with
ZINC OINTMENT. In urgent recent cases, the remedies above referred to
may be given, four doses in a day. But in general the treatment first
named will suffice.

ACCESSORY MEANS.—Strict attention must be given to diet; flesh must be
utterly prohibited, except in the case of weak puppies, or when the
disease has occasioned great debility, and then broth will be better
than solid flesh. To gross dogs a few days’ abstinence will do no harm;
they may thus become willing to take boiled rice, which should be
offered fresh every day; but if declined, withdrawn at once. If the dog
refuse to eat more than three days, an ounce or two of meat (according
to his size) may be given to keep him alive, without satisfying his
hunger. Vegetable or farinaceous food should still be offered sparingly,
and when taken, the morsels of flesh should be discontinued. Do no more
washing than is necessary. Dirt scabs, etc., should be removed with
olive oil. The dog’s bed should be repeatedly changed, and his kennel
well ventilated; he should have free, moderate exercise in the open air,
and be fully supplied with fresh water.


                            Boils—Furuncles

Boils, which may appear on any part of the body, are small, round, red,
hard, painful tumors, with raised centers, from which they supperate.
When ripe, the boil should be opened and the pus pressed out. Warm
fomentations will hasten the ripening.

TREATMENT.—Give A.A., a dose three times per day, one to three drops,
according to the size of the dog. If the boil is red and painful, apply
HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL, two or three times per day. The boils should
be opened when they have come to a head.


                            Louse—Tick—Flea

The dog louse (_trichodectes latus_), the dog tick (_irod ricinus_), and
the dog flea (_pulex canis_) are sources of no little torment. They
cause considerable irritation, which induces the dog to scratch and rub
himself; small pimples are formed, their heads are rubbed off, serum
exudes, perhaps matter, and thus sores are produced. Lice are found in
every part of the body, but particularly on the head and about the eyes
and lips. They do not live on man. Ticks do not infest house dogs.

TREATMENT.—Fleas are best removed by means of Persian Insect Powder
(Flores Pyrethri), this may be dusted on the dog or better dissolved in
alcohol or water and sprinkled or rubbed on, another convenient way is
to dust on the powder after a bath and before the hair has entirely
dried. As this powder renders the fleas insensible rather than killing
them, means should be taken to prevent the fleas getting back on the dog
after they have recovered.

For house dogs a convenient way is to stand the dog on newspapers while
dusting on the powder and hold him there for a few minutes until the
fleas have dropped off; then carefully gather up the papers and burn
them.

For larger dogs in the country the powder may be dusted on out-doors and
away from stables, kennels, etc., and the dog kept out until the fleas
have left him.

The sleeping quarters of the dog must also be carefully attended to, the
box or basket should be washed with creoline or lysol solution or may be
washed with water and dusted with the powder while still damp; the
bedding should be washed in boiling water if possible or if a pillow is
used it may be placed in an oven sufficiently hot to kill the fleas but
not hot enough to scorch pillow.

If the dog is very young or feeble brush the powder off after it has
been on for 15 minutes.

Lice and ticks are readily killed by Kerosene (Coal Oil). For small
house dogs, Spirit of Anise or Oil of Anise, with 10% of Olive Oil, is
probably a better remedy. Any of these should be applied night and
morning, for two days and then washed off. Then the dog should be
carefully combed to remove the eggs which adhere to the hair paying
particular attention to the face, around the eyes etc.

Do not attempt to pick lice or ticks off dogs, as very often the head
remains in the skin, causing a small sore. Wait until the application
has killed him and he will drop off. The bedding should be treated as
for fleas.


                                 Mange

Mange differs from eczema in being contagious and caused by parasites.
The eruption in each case looks the same to the layman; however mange
usually comes on those parts of the body where the hair is short and the
skin tender, such as, the head, chest and abdomen, the inside of the
thigh. White eczema usually does the opposite and attacks the back and
outer parts, where the hair is long and the skin thick.

TREATMENT.—The acari must be killed by an external application of some
sort, Creoline or lysol are excellent, these may be bought at any drug
store, and diluted according to the directions on the bottle. For small
house dogs, Peruvian Balsam is undoubtedly the best application, but it
is expensive; any of these should be applied twice a day for several
days, means should be taken to keep the dog from licking off the
ointment.

In addition, give the I.I., three to five drops, night and morning, to
relieve the itching and promote a healthy growth of hair and skin.


                               Sore Feet

These may be occasioned by injuries, long traveling over rough and
frozen ground, or in very dry weather.

SYMPTOMS.—The foot is swelled, and small, hard, painful lumps are felt
in it; there is much pain, and the animal cannot bear its weight upon
them. The skin becomes red, and the nails fall off. There is usually
considerable fever and no desire to eat.

TREATMENT.—Bathe the feet three or four times per day in HUMPHREYS’
MARVEL WITCH HAZEL, or apply HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL, and give,
morning and night, a dose of three or five drops of A.A.

If matter forms, a poultice may be applied, and the abscess afterwards
opened.


                               Fractures

Simple fractures of the leg are very readily cured in young and vigorous
dogs. It may be readily known by the distortion of the limb, by the ends
of the bone grating upon each other, lameness, etc.

TREATMENT is very simple. Extend the limb and put the bones in place,
and apply splints with a firm bandage, wetting the limb with HUMPHREYS’
MARVEL WITCH HAZEL. Examine them from time to time to see that they are
kept in place. After three or four weeks they may be removed, and the
animal trusted to use its limbs. Give B.B., night and morning, for a few
days, three or five drops, according to the size of the animal.


                               Hemorrhage

Occasionally dogs discharge blood from the nose, mouth or anus, after a
long run, after going uphill, or after blows or other external injuries.
Consideration should be given to the specific cause. Arnica, internally
and externally, will often be found curative, or a dose of A.A. For an
alarming hemorrhage, give a spoonful of HUMPHREYS’ MARVEL, WITCH HAZEL,
and repeat it every hour if necessary.




                                PART V.
                       Diseases of Swine and Hogs




                               CHAPTER I.


Hogs have at times been known to have practically all of the diseases
common to other domestic animals. However, in spite of unsanitary
surroundings and manner of life, these diseases are very rare, and (in
the United States) when a hog gets sick it probably has hog cholera.


                              Hog Cholera

There are two forms of hog cholera, the acute, and the chronic: however,
since the only difference of importance is the length of time the
disease takes to kill the hog, it is not worth while to try to decide
which form it is.

SYMPTOMS.—The hog has fever; appears dull and sleepy; lies down and does
not want to rise or move about; the eyes are red and bloodshot, with a
discharge which often glues the eyelids together; and a watery diarrhea.

TREATMENT.—There is no known cure for hog cholera; prevention is the
only thing.

In this respect the serum gotten up by the U. S. Department of
Agriculture has done more than anything else to eradicate the disease.

There are two methods of inoculating the hog, the single and the double.

In the double method the anti-toxin is injected into the hog and also a
quantity of the disease germs, this produces a lasting immunity.

In the single method the anti-toxin alone is used, this only produces a
transient immunity unless the hog is soon after exposed to the disease,
in which case the immunity becomes lasting.

The single method should be used where cholera has already broken out in
a herd, to protect the animals which have not yet acquired the disease;
in all other cases the double method should be used.

A farmer should not attempt to give the serum unless he has had
considerable experience with it and seen competent people properly
administer it; otherwise call in a Veterinarian, his charges will be
less than the value of the hogs that would otherwise be lost.




                                PART VI.
                          Diseases of Poultry




                               CHAPTER I.
          Doses and Methods of Preparing the Remedies for Use.


ONE DROP or PART of a DROP is quite sufficient as a dose for an ordinary
fowl. One drop of any remedy put into a teaspoonful of water or milk,
and this put into a teacup so as to _be thoroughly mixed_, is a
sufficient dose for FIVE FOWLS of full size, or ten chickens.

WHERE A FLOCK or several fowls are to be treated, drop ten drops of the
proper remedy into a cup, to which add ten teaspoonfuls of water, milk
or curdled milk, and after _stirring it thoroughly_ with a perfectly
clean spoon, mix this with the meal, grain or bread, or whatever food is
given them. If the quantity of fluid should not be sufficient to
properly moisten the food, more can be added without detriment, provided
the mass be _thoroughly stirred and mixed_ before wetting the food. This
would be enough for fifty fowls. Some will get more and some less, of
course; but each will probably get enough to answer a curative purpose,
and none will get so much as to be injurious.

If a bird is so ill as not to eat or drink, and the Remedy must be given
by hand, the mouth may be gently opened and two or three drops of the
mixture, made in the proportion of one drop of the Remedy to a
_teaspoonful_ of water, may be turned down, or the fluid may be turned
on soft food and thus given, at the intervals mentioned under each
separate disease.

_Bread soaked in milk or water_, cooked cracked wheat or curdled milk
is, in general, the best food for sick or ailing fowls.


                    Aspergillosis—Brooder Pneumonia

This disease affects both the adult birds and the young chickens often
causing serious loss among the latter.

The disease is caused by a fungus or mold which grows on straw, grain,
etc., and is either inhaled in breathing or swallowed by the chicken; it
sticks to the air passages and grows there as it did on the straw or
grain, in small, yellow patches.

SYMPTOMS.—In the adult fowl, the first symptoms are apt to pass
unnoticed, these are loss of appetite and increased thirst, then the
fowl loses weight; the breathing becomes labored and is accompanied by a
rattle in the throat from the mucus which collects. This keeps on
getting worse until the bird dies.

In young chickens the first symptoms are a sleepy and lifeless
appearance and drooping wings. This is followed by rapid breathing and
rattle in the throat and white diarrhea, which may be mistaken for the
disease of that name (see page 269).

This disease may be mistaken for Anemia or Tuberculosis in the adult, or
White Diarrhea in the chicken, and the only sure way is to kill a bird
and examine the air passages and lungs; which will be found covered with
patches of white or greenish-yellow membrane.

TREATMENT.—There is no cure for this disease and we must rely on
prevention. Kill all affected birds and thoroughly disinfect the
quarters, and be very careful not to give moldy grain or use moldy
straw.


                               Blackhead

This disease is particularly destructive to young turkeys when from 2
weeks to 4 months old. Other domestic fowls probably carry the disease
without being themselves affected.

The disease is caused by a very small animal known as an amoeba and much
too small to be seen by the naked eye. These amoeba are swallowed in
eating or drinking and make their way to the spot where the large and
small intestine join. At that point there are two blind pouches, and the
amoeba stick there and increase and multiply, until the intestine is
almost completely obstructed; they also pass to the liver which becomes
covered with yellowish or yellowish-green spots. From the position in
the intestine the amoeba pass out with the excrement to infect more
turkeys.

SYMPTOMS.—The young turkeys appear dull and listless, and do not follow
the flock, and seem to have lost interest; the wings droop and the bird
gets weaker and weaker; diarrhea is present and often a peculiar
discoloration of the head which gives the name “blackhead”.

TREATMENT.—So far no successful cure has been found for this disease,
and we must rely on prevention. Diseased birds should be killed at once,
their bodies burned and the runways, houses, etc., thoroughly
disinfected. Turkeys should not be confined with other domestic fowls,
for while these do not suffer from “blackhead” they are believed to
carry it.


                               Bronchitis

Is known by the frequent coughing, and if observed, a more frequent
respiration than in health, and generally a well marked rattling in the
throat may be noticed. In the more advanced stage there is discharge, as
in catarrh, or a slight discharge as it gets well. Give the A.A., two or
three times per day.


                              Bumble Foot

Occurs mostly in the large breeds of fowls, and is supposed to be caused
by bruising the foot when alighting on a hard surface, or in resting on
a small or uneven perch. There is a swelling or corn in the bottom of
the foot, which softens, becomes ulcerated, forming a putrid surface or
sore. Remove the putrid or decayed matter carefully, and paint with
iodine; this may be repeated two or three times, and give, internally,
the J.K., or if the foot is hot and swelled and not yet maturated, the
A.A., may dissipate the swelling without its maturating. The bird should
be kept on the straw and not suffered to rest on the perch.


                                Cholera

Usually makes its appearance as a diarrhea, with frequent greenish
droppings and violent thirst, and extreme weakness and rapid failing of
strength; the birds staggering or falling about, and often attacks of
cramps. There is generally also an anxious look in the face. The disease
is sometimes rapidly fatal, death occurring in one or two days.

It is generally admitted to be caused by confining too many birds in
close, limited quarters; insufficient shade; stale, unhealthy drinking
water; exposure to the hot sun; feeding on grass-runs covered with
droppings, and the want also of a regular supply of fresh green food.
The disease rarely or never occurs where fowls have a liberal range,
clean runs, good water and green food daily.

TREATMENT.—The flock should at once be removed from their unhealthy
surroundings, and be given a clear, ample range, and the F.F., every
three hours in urgent cases, or three times per day to those who are yet
able to eat. The yards should be scraped free of droppings and covered
with clean earth. Disinfect pens with 5% carbolic acid or fumigate with
sulphur and whitewash with 5% carbolic in the whitewash.


                              Tuberculosis

Is sometimes observed in fowls, manifested by wasting of flesh and great
weakness, notwithstanding good feed. The disease is incurable and
affected birds should be killed at once.

In large flocks in close quarters where a few of the birds have it, it
will usually be found that all have it, and it may be cheaper in the
long run to destroy the entire flock, thoroughly disinfect the entire
premises and stock up over again.


                                 Cramps

Chickens are sometimes subject to this disease, especially in damp, cold
weather. The toes are first seen to be bent under, and by degrees they
walk on the knuckles or outside of the foot, and the birds often squat
on the hock. If it is the result of a cold, and the chickens are
feverish, as is generally the case, remove them to a comfortable place,
and give them the A.A., three times per day. If it fails after a day or
two, try the J.K. If the toes are badly cramped, they may be washed in
warm water and gently opened and kneaded by the fingers, and afterwards
be wiped dry.


                               Crop Bound

This is caused by the bird gorging itself with grain, tough meat or
bone, too large to be digested. When the crop is so distended with hard
food or other substance, the outlet is narrowed or entirely closed, so
that mechanical manipulation may be necessary to cause its passage.

Where the crop is distended with hard food, and is not passing off, and
help is required, pour some milk-warm water down the throat, and then,
holding the head downward, quietly manipulate or knead the distended
crop with the hand, so as to soften the mass. After the mass has thus
been carefully softened, pour down a large teaspoonful of castor or
sweet oil, and the mass will be gradually worked off. Food should not be
allowed for some time. Give also the J.K., two or three times a day,
which may be continued to entire recovery. In many cases the use of the
J.K., will be successful without the use of any other means.


                   Diarrhea and Dysentery (Scouring)

Is not uncommon among fowls, caused usually by improper food or sudden
changes of weather, or severe exposure. In diarrhea the droppings are
only too frequent, watery, scalding or excessive, with consequent
drooping and wasting of flesh; while, if this condition is unchecked,
the discharges become bloody or mingled with blood and mucous, forming a
real _dysentery_. This latter form of the disease is said to be
contagious, and requires that the diseased birds should be separated
from the flock and the dead ones buried deeply, far away from the yards
or pens of the flock, and the yards and pens thoroughly disinfected or
use new ones. The treatment is the same; the F.F., should be given,
three or four times per day. The food should be boiled milk thickened
with flour, and well cooked, or good bread softened in scalded milk. Of
course the birds should have a clean, dry and well littered and
sheltered place.


                               Egg Bound

Sometimes hens are unable to drop the egg from its unusual size. This is
usually manifested by the hens coming off the nest and moping around
with the wings down and in evident distress. A large spoonful of castor
or olive oil often relieves, to which should be added a dose of G.G.
Should this fail after an hour, bathe the vent with warm water, and then
with a feather dipped in oil, lubricate or freely oil the passage or
viaduct, taking care not to break the egg. Should the egg passage be
ruptured or protruded, the I.I., may be given, one or two doses, to
promote the healing.


                               Scaly Legs

This disease is caused by a little mite which gets on the chickens legs
and burrowing under the skin and scales causes the legs to become
enlarged and the scales very prominent.

TREATMENT.—The best application so far tried seems to be an ointment
composed of 1 part oil of caraway and 5 parts white vaseline, this
should be rubbed on the legs every few days until the disease
disappears. The mites can also be killed by putting a teaspoonful of
kerosene oil in a quart measure of water and dipping in the foot.
However there is more danger of irritation than with the oil of caraway,
and very much so if any of the oil gets on the feathers.


                             Feather Eating

This unnatural appetite, mostly observed in the hen, is the expression
of some chemical want in the system, which, not satisfied in the food or
drink of the fowl, manifests itself in picking and eating the feathers.
Whatever supplies this want will relieve the expression of it, or, in
other words, the habit. To this end the birds should have good feed and
a grass run, if possible. If not, fine grass should be chopped up and
given them, as also green food. _Bones_ should be burned in the fire,
then pounded small and put within their reach. This will supply the
carbonate of lime, should that be wanting, and an occasional feed of
wet-up bran will supply the silex, should the desire arise from
deprivation of that. Some animal food, well peppered, may also be used
advantageously. Give also the J.K., morning and night.


                               Fractures

Broken wings or legs in fowls may be set without much trouble, if the
fractured ends of bones are brought together and secured. The leg or
thigh may be held straight, with the broken ends neatly in position, and
a rag, or even paper wet in white of egg, carefully wrapped around it
several times. The white of egg hardens as it dries, and furnishes a
sufficient protection until the callus is formed. Broken wings are best
secured by tying the feathers firmly together about an inch from the
end, after having put the fractured ends neatly in place.


                              Frost Bites

If the comb or wattles are frost bitten, they should be at first rubbed
with snow or icy cold water, until the natural color and suppleness is
restored, and then an application of HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY OIL. Two or
three applications will usually suffice.


                         Gapes, or Throat Worms

This disease is so called from the peculiar action of the chickens who
are affected with it. It is caused by the presence of a pale reddish
worm, some three-quarters of an inch in length, which infest the mouth
and throat, and of which from two to a dozen are found in a chicken,
each usually doubled up. These worms are a species of pin worms, and
have been bred in damp earth, and hence are found among chickens which
are _bred in damp, moist soils_, and are rarely ever known when the
birds have a _clean, high or gravel yard_. The spawn of these worms are
deposited by myriads in the moist, unclean soil, are thrown out by the
coughing and efforts of the ones infected, and becomes developed in the
most barren soil or in water, and thence transplanted to the crop with
the feed, become developed in the throat of the chick. This is the most
recent position of scientific knowledge on this subject.

The best method of treatment is to remove, where possible, the chickens
to a dry locality, and to give them the D.D., morning and night. FEED
THE FOWLS and chicks with _finely chopped_ ONIONS OR GARLIC (_tops and
bottoms_,) _mixed with their food_. Experience shows the good results of
this thoroughly scientific—as well as practical treatment. To remove the
worms from the throat, make a loop of one or two horse hairs, which
thrust down the throat, and with a slight twist draw it out, bringing
the worms with it. This may be repeated until the throat is cleared. Or
a quill feather, stripped to within an inch or two of its end, may be
dipped in a mixture of glycerine or oil, and petroleum, made in the
proportion of three parts of oil or glycerine, to one part of petroleum.
Dip the feather in the mixture, and in like manner pass it into and well
down the throat, and with a twist bring it out with the worms adhering.
The used feathers and remaining oil _should be burned_ to destroy the
larvæ of the worms, and fresh feathers used freely, so as not to spread
the worms or their larvæ.


                           Gout or Rheumatism

May be distinguished by the birds being lame, walking with difficulty
and sitting about, and on examination the legs or thighs will be found
hot and feverish; or in cases of longer standing, there will be evident
stiffness of the joints and weakness of the legs, and in some cases
contraction of the toes, which indicate cramps. The bird should be kept
in a comfortable, dry place, and the B.B., given it three times a day.
It is produced by exposure to cold and wet, or to sudden change of
temperature.


                              Leg Weakness

In large breeds of fowls, and especially when being bred “in and in,” so
that the stamina of the system is lowered, there is a deficient growth
of bony matter, and the birds are weak, squatting around or walking on
their hocks. It may be remedied by giving the J.K., morning and night,
and bones or oyster shells should be burned in the fire, and then
pounded small, and the dust occasionally mixed with the food or placed
where the fowls have access to it. This will increase the deposit of
ossific matter and impart strength to the legs.


                               Giddiness

Which is liable to occur in over-fed birds, if suffered to continue, may
result in apoplexy. A dose or two of the A.A., will equalize the
circulation and remove the difficulty and danger.


                                  Lice

The symptoms of lice are too well known to require description. Where
fowl have ample range and well ventilated, sunny coops, the fowl will
usually keep fairly clear of lice, particularly if they can find a sandy
spot for a dust bath.

However, if a flock becomes badly infested, measures must be taken to
kill the lice on the individual birds. This is best done by sprinkling
powder on the bird. Pyrethrium powder commonly called Persian Insect
Powder, is good, or, the following powder is recommended by the Maine
Experiment Station, as being the most effective, yet cheapest, that they
have been able to find.

Take 3 parts gasoline and 1 part cresol, mix these together and add
gradually with stirring enough plaster of paris to take up all the
moisture.

Either of these powders should be dusted on the chicken, particularly
around the vent, the under side of the body and beneath the wings.

For young chicks greasing is usually better than dusting. Use either
lard, or better, lard and sulphur. This should be applied by the finger,
to the head, neck, under the wings and around the vent.


                      Indigestion—Loss of Appetite

If, as sometimes happens in consequence of over-feeding or the use of
too highly seasoned food, fowls lose their appetite, and the digestion
and thrift is impaired, a change to soft, well cooked food, and the use,
night and morning, of the J.K., will soon correct the difficulty.


                             Liver Disease

There are several different diseases that affect the liver, but since
the external symptoms, causes and treatment are the same for all of
them, it is of no practical value to differentiate between them.

Liver disease is caused by insufficient exercise, confinement in damp
quarters, and too rich feed. Therefore it is not so common in Summer and
Fall, and is most common in the Spring after the fowl have been more or
less confined during the winter.

SYMPTOMS.—The fowl die often with little apparent reason, but on
examination the liver will be found either too large or too small, or in
other unnatural condition.

TREATMENT.—Plenty of open air exercise, with green feed will gradually
get the flock back in shape, except perhaps for a few in which the
disease has already gone too far to stop it.


                                Moulting

We should take into consideration the great drain upon the system of
fowls in moulting. Not only are the ordinary wastes of the body to be
maintained, but the old summer coat of feathers is to be discarded and
an entirely new one to be produced, involving in its growth all the
essential elements of which the feathers are composed. If these
substances—lime, carbon, sulphur, silex, etc.—are not to be had in the
food provided for them, or are imperfectly produced or eliminated, the
work drags and the organism suffers, and waste of flesh, poverty of the
system or illness is the result. Hence it is a wise precaution, during
the season of moulting, to allow the flock a more generous supply of
food, and of better quality than usual, and to exercise more than
ordinary care in housing and shelter. Fowls that have fair feed and a
reasonable range will rarely require special care, but those confined
are more apt to suffer. Any stimulating food is of advantage. Hemp seed
is very beneficial, and iron is invaluable. An _acetate_ of _iron_ may
be readily made by putting some nails or other bits of iron in _cider_.
This, after standing a day or two, may be used in mixing the feed. More
cider may be added as required, and so the cider and iron may be kept
and used during the entire moulting season. The I.I., is the proper
remedy, and should also be given two or three times per week, or even
more frequently if the birds are suffering much.

A little care and attention in this respect will shorten the period of
moulting and bring the birds out in better health and vigor and better
plumage.


                              Pip or Chirp

Young chickens are affected by a peculiar form of disease termed pip or
chirp, from the short, spasmodic chirups which they make during the
complaint. The chickens mope about uttering this peculiar cry, and seek
refuge in solitary places, as it is the instinct of animals and birds to
pick at, maim or destroy the sick or maimed among them. The chicken is
hot and feverish, although trembling violently, and they are extremely
tender on being handled, and soon a dark-colored, dry, horny scale will
be found at the end of the tongue, and the beak may turn yellow at the
base; the appetite fails and the plumage becomes ruffled, and they
gradually sink and die. It is doubtless caused by exposure to wet
weather, as the light down is easily saturated, and is long in drying.
The A.A., may be given at first, one or two doses, and afterwards the
J.K., three times per day. The removal of the scale at the end of the
tongue is of no consequence. That is not the cause of the disease, but
the result, and the tongue will come all right so soon as the chick is
restored in his circulation and digestion. Of course the birds should be
well housed and fed on soft food.


                                  Roup

Almost all forms of chronic catarrh in fowls go by the name of roup. It
usually begins as a severe cold, caused by exposure to cold, wet and
damp. There is discharge from the nostrils, at first of thin mucus, and
which soon becomes opaque, and even offensive, and the entire cavity of
the nose may become filled up; froth and mucus fill the inner angle of
the eye, the lids are swelled and often the eye-ball quite concealed,
and in severe cases the entire face is considerably swelled. It is said
to be contagious, but is probably only so in extremely virulent cases.
But the fact that a flock of fowls are exposed to similar disease-making
conditions, and that many are taken nearly at the same time, would
countenance the idea of its contagious character. The causes of the
disease should be avoided by providing shelter for chickens during the
cold, chilly, fall nights, and not permitting them to wander around
without feed in the cold, raw mornings. A plentiful supply of nourishing
food and comfortable shelter when sudden cold changes of weather occur,
will do much to prevent the appearance of this disease and the
consequent loss. The iron and cider with the food will be useful, and
onions cut up fine and mixed in the soft feed, is also an invaluable
agent for fowls affected with any form of roup. The A.A., is the proper
remedy, two or three doses at first, during the inflammatory stage. Then
the C.C., is the proper remedy, and may be relied upon. Give it as often
as three, or even four times per day, in extreme cases. Of course the
severe cases should be well housed, have warm and dry lodgings, free
from exposure to open windows and cold drafts of air, as the bird is
liable to new chill from fresh exposure. Washing the head and syringing
out the nose, and washing the throat with salt and vinegar, or even with
water and castile soap, is rarely necessary and really of very little
consequence. As the catarrh passes off, the secretions will become
healthy and natural, and all these discharges disappear.


                               Soft Eggs

May be a sign of over-feeding, but are more commonly from the want of
material of which to form the shell—lime, starch, sulphur, etc. The
flock should have an occasional feed of mashed potatoes and lime; old
mortar; burnt oyster shells, pounded up, should be placed in reach. An
occasional dose of J.K., will be beneficial.


                             White Diarrhea

This disease probably causes more loss among newly hatched chicks than
all other diseases combined. It attacks chicks when from 1 to 3 weeks
old, and usually when the chicks are over 3 weeks old they are safe from
it.

White Diarrhea is caused by a germ, and when a flock have this disease,
it will be found that some of the chicks were born with this disease and
gave it to the others.

When a flock of chicks have this disease, most of them will die, but a
few live through, and it is found that these few who live through are
the ones that carry the disease. The germs in this case resides in the
ovaries and are in every egg such a hen lays. The chicks hatched from
these eggs develop the disease and communicate it to the others.

SYMPTOMS.—The chicks appear stupid and remain under the hen most of the
time as if cold; they do not run around with the others but remain by
themselves. The feathers are rough and the wings droop. They lose weight
and eat little or nothing. A white diarrhea appears from which the
disease gets its name; this is usually creamy, but sometimes there is a
little brown in it. This discharge is sticky and sometimes even plugs up
the vent. The chick will often utter a shrill cry, apparently of pain
when voiding.

TREATMENT.—No satisfactory cure has yet been found for this disease and
we must rely on prevention.

Where eggs are hatched under a hen, if one of a setting develops this
disease, the entire setting should be killed and the nest and quarters
of the setting disinfected.

In using incubators, the eggs should be taken on the 18th day and placed
in wire trays or baskets, holding about 12 eggs each, and after the
chicks are hatched they should remain in these trays until 48 hours old,
then any trays that have developed the disease should be destroyed.




[Illustration: [Case]]

                     Humphreys’ Veterinary Remedies


                        Prices of Single Bottles


 SINGLE BOTTLE, Small,                                          =$  .60=

 SINGLE BOTTLE, Medium,                                           =2.00=

 SINGLE BOTTLE, Large,                                            =3.00=


                         Prices of Stable Cases


 STABLE CASE, Handle, Lock and Key, containing Veterinary
   Manual. Ten bottles Remedies. Jar Veterinary Oil and
   Medicator complete,                                            =7.00=

 STABLE CASE, Handle, Lock and Key, containing Veterinary
   Manual. Ten medium size bottles Remedies, Jar Veterinary
   Oil, and Medicator, complete,                                 =20.00=

 STABLE CASE, Handle, Lock and Key, containing Veterinary
   Manual, Ten large size bottles Remedies, Jar Veterinary Oil,
   and Medicator, complete,                                      =30.00=

 JAR VETERINARY OIL,                                              =1.00=

 HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY MANUAL,                                     =.50=

 MEDICATOR (for administering Remedies),                           =.25=

  Sold by all druggists, or sent on receipt of price or C.O.D. Parcel
                                 Post.

                   Humphreys’ Homeo. Medicine Company
                  Cor. William and Ann Sts., New York




                           SKETCH OF A HORSE,

 Showing the principal points and the external parts to be examined for
                    injuries, defects and diseases.

   1. Muzzle.

   2. Place of Fistula from Teeth.

   3. Place of Mumps.

   4. Place of Poll evil.

   5. Angle of Jaw.

   6, 6. Crest.

   7. Place of Fistula from Vein.

   8. Throttle, Thropple or Windpipe.

   9. Shoulder-point: place of Sores from Harness.

  10, 10. Shoulder blade.

  11. Withers; sometimes the seat of Fistula: height of horses reckoned
        from the Ground to the Withers.

  12. Front of Chest, Bosom, or Breast.

  13, 13. The True Arm. (See Skeleton.)

  14. Elbow; often the seat of Tumours.

  15. Arm, or Fore-arm.

  16. Knee, or Wrist; may be swelled, having a fungous growth; or the
        skin may have been broken—evidence of a fall.

  17, 17. Back Sinew: place of Curb.

  18. Place of Disease of Skin above the Coronet—Crown scab.

  19, 19. Fetlock, or Pastern Joint.

  20. Coronet.

  21, 21. Heel.

  22. Contracted Hoof.

  23. Mallenders.

  24. Sallenders.

  25. Seat of Splint, or Exostosis, on Side of Cannon-bone.

  26, 26, 26. Seat of Bursal Enlargements.

  27. Back, or spine.

  28. Place of Saddle galls.

  29, 29. Girth, or Circumference in Measurement.

  30. Place of Injury from Pressure of Girth.

  31. Barrel, or Middle-piece.

  32. Loins.

  33. Croup.

  34. Haunch.

  35. Flank.

  36. Seat of Warts.

  37. Sheath, or Prepuce.

  38, 38. Gas-skin, or Lower Thigh.

  39. Root of the Dock, or Tail.

  40. Hip joint—Round or Whirl-bone.

  41. Rat-tail.

  42. The Quarters.

  43. Point of the Hock; seat of Capped hock.

  44, 44. Cannon-bone.

  45. Place of Spavin.

  46, 46. Hoof.

[Illustration: SKELETON OF THE HORSE. SHOWING THE PRINCIPAL BONES AND
REGIONS.]

   1. Scapula, or Shoulder Blade.

   2. Humerus, or True Arm.

   3. Withers.

   4. Pelvis, or Haunch Bone.

   5. Patella, or Stifle.

   6. Femur.

   7. Tibia.

   8. Os Calcis.

   9. Sesamoid Bones.

  10. Radius.

  11. Metacarpal Bones.

  12. Great, or Upper, Pastern bone.

  13. Small, or Lower, Pastern Bone.

  14. Os Pedis.

  15. Trapezium.

  16. Metatarsal Bones.

  17. Hip Joint.

  18. Lower Jaw-Bone.

 18a. Place to feel the Pulse.

  19. Posterior Maxillary Bone.

  20. Nasal Bone.

  21. Anterior Maxillary Bone.

  22. Atlas.

  23. Sternum.

  24. Astragalus.

  25. Tarsal Bones.

  26. Carpal Bones.

  27. Upper Region.

  28. Middle Region.

  29. Lower Region.

   x. Ribs.

   v. Vertebræ.

[Illustration: [Horse]]




                       Humphreys’ Veterinary Oil

                            An Ointment For

                      External use on Dumb Animals

For Burns or Scalds; Sores or Indolent Ulcers, Sore Scabby, Harness
Collar or Saddle Galls or Chafings, Sore Teats; Fistulas or Deep-Seated
Ulcers, Broken Knees or Open Joints; Old Sores; Horny Places or Warts;
Hot Swellings, Boils, Scratches; Greased or Cracked Heels; Broken Hoof,
Sand or Quarter Crack Corns; Tender or Bruised Soles; Dry Shaly or
Ill-Growing Hoofs; Castration Docking, Dehorning etc.

 LARGE JAR, PRICE                                                  $1.00

  Sold by all druggists, or sent on receipt of price, or C.O.D. Parcel
                                  Post


                   Humphreys’ Homeo. Medicine Company

                     Corner William and Ann Streets

                                NEW YORK




                               HUMPHREYS’

                                 MARVEL

                              WITCH HAZEL


[Illustration: [Witch]]

=This Medicine is a pure distillation of the well known shrub Hamamelis
Virginica, commonly known as the Witch Hazel.=

As a family remedy, always useful, always ready, never injurious, always
reliable, does not poison or irritate, stain or injure. Is used as an
external remedy or a lotion to apply.

For Wounds, Bruises, Contusions; Burns or Scalds; Piles, internal or
external; Rheumatic Lameness, Soreness, or Stiffness; Excoriated or Sore
Nipples; Sunburns, Mosquito Bites, Corns, Sore Feet; Sore Throat; A
toilet article for shaving or bathing.

  Sold by all druggists, or sent on receipt of price, or C.O.D. Parcel
                                 Post.

                        Full Measure Guaranteed

                   Humphreys’ Homeo. Medicine Company

                  Cor. William and Ann Sts., New York




                               HUMPHREYS’

                          Witch Hazel Ointment
                              (COMPOUND.)

                          “THE PILE OINTMENT”

         ONE APPLICATION GIVES RELIEF      SAMPLE MAILED FREE.


In Humphreys Witch Hazel Ointment (Comp.) you have not only the virtues
of the Witch Hazel, but also an Anti-Septic and Anti-Microbic—a remedy
of great efficiency and celerity.

For Piles, Hemorrhoids, Blind or Bleeding, External or Internal and
Itching or Bleeding of the Rectum: Ulcerations, Eruptions, Cracks or
Fissures of the anus or rectum; Chafings, Dryness, Irritations, Itching,
Excoriation of the skin, Burns and Scalds; Chapped Hands, Fever
Blisters, Boils, Corns, Bunions Sore and Lame Feet; An emollient or
application for Swelled Face, Swelled Ankle, Knee, Foot or Joints, from
Rheumatism.

For further information see Witch Hazel Ointment (Comp.) Book.

  Sold by all druggists, or sent on receipt of price, or C.O.D. Parcel
                                 Post.

                   Humphreys’ Homeo. Medicine Company
                   Cor William and Ann Sts., New York




                    Humphreys’ Homeopathic Remedies


   No.        FOR

   =1= =Fevers=, Congestions, Inflammations

   =2= =Worms=, =Worm Fever= or Worm Diseases

   =3= =Colic=, Crying and Wakefulness of Infants

   =4= =Diarrhea=, of Children and Adults

   =5= =Dysentery=, Gripings, Bilious Colic

   =6= =Cholera Morbus=, Vomiting

   =7= =Coughs=, Colds, Bronchitis

   =8= =Toothache=, Faceache, Neuralgia

   =9= =Headache=, Sick Headache, Vertigo

  =10= =Dyspepsia=, Indigestion, Weak Stomach

  =11= =Suppressed Menses= or Scanty

  =12= =Leucorrhea= or Profuse Menses

  =13= =Croup=, Hoarse Cough, Laryngitis.

  =14= =Eczema=, Eruptions, Erysipelas.

  =15= =Rheumatism=, Lumbago.

  =16= =Malaria=, Fever and Ague

  =17= =Piles=, Blind or Bleeding, External, Internal

  =18= =Ophthalmia=, Sore or Inflamed Eyes

  =19= =Catarrh=, Influenza, Cold in the Head

  =20= =Whooping Cough=, Spasmodic Cough

  =21= =Asthma=, Oppressed, Difficult Breathing

  =22= =Ear Discharge=, Earache

  =23= =Swellings and Enlarged Glands=

  =24= =General Debility=, “Tonic Tablets”

  =25= =Dropsy=, Fluid Accumulations

  =26= =Nausea=, Vomiting, Sea-Sickness

  =27= =Disorders of the Kidney and Urinary System=

  =28= =Nervous Prostration=

  =29= =Sore Mouth=, Canker, Fever Blisters

  =30= =Urinary Incontinence=, Wetting Bed

  =31= =Painful Menses=, Pruritus

  =32= =Disorders of the Heart=, Palpitations

  =33= =Spasms or Convulsions=

  =34= =Sore Throat and Quinsy=

  =35= =Chronic Congestions=, Headache

  =40= =Induces Repose= and Natural Refreshing Sleep

  =77= =Grip=, =La Grippe=, =Grippe=

  Sold by all druggists, or sent on receipt of price, or C.O.D. Parcel
                                 Post.

                   Humphreys’ Homeo. Medicine Company
                  Cor. William and Ann Sts., New York




                          Humphreys’ Remedies

                                  for

                              Family Use.


=No. 1=—=For Fevers, Congestions and Inflammations=; =Heat, Pain=;
Inflammation and Congestion of the Head; Inflammation of the Eyes;
Inflammation of the Throat, or Quinsy, alone, or in alternation with
=No. 34=; or Inflammation of the Chest; Inflammation of the Liver and of
the Bowels; Fevers of Children; Measles; Inflammatory, Bilious or
Gastric Fever; Effects of being Over-heated; Violent Throbbing
Headaches. The first stage of any inflammatory disease or Fever,
Measles, Croup, Mumps, Cough, or Cold or Sore Throat, calls for =No. 1=.

=No. 2=—=For Worm Diseases, Worm Fevers=; =Worm Colic=; Itching of the
Anus, or Wetting the Bed from Worms; Irregular or Capricious Appetite,
or Emaciation from Worms; Long Round Worms; Pin Worms.

=No. 3=—=For Infants Diseases, Sleeplessness, Colic and Crying of
Infants= or young Children, such as Restlessness; Irritation and
Congestion from Teething and Feebleness of Infants; Irregular Teething;
Diarrhea of Infants.

=No. 4=—=For Diarrhea or Loose Bowels=, in Children or Adults; =Summer
Complaint= or =Cholera Infantum=; Thin, Loose, Yellowish, Greenish or
Watery Stools, Diarrhea from Indigestible Food; Diarrhea from the use of
Fruit; Diarrhea from Traveling or Change of Water; Painful Diarrhea,
Chronic Diarrhea or Loose Bowels.

=No. 5=—=For Dysentery, Colic, Painful or Bloody Diarrhea=; Fall
Dysentery or Bloody Flux; Slimy, Scanty Mucus; Greenish and Bloody
Stools, attended with violent Colic or Straining and Tenesmus; Painful
Diarrhea; Colic; Bilious Colic; Hemorrhoidal Colic.

=No. 6=—=For Cholera Morbus=; =Nausea and Vomiting=; Sickness at the
Stomach; Vomiting with Diarrhea; Thin, Loose, Urgent or Rice-Water
Stools, with Vomiting, Coldness, Paleness, Blue Lips and Cramps; Morning
Sickness.

=No. 7=—=For Coughs, Bronchitis=, Cough, with Pain and Stitches in the
Side or Breast; Cough with Pain or Soreness in the Throat and Bronchia;
Hoarseness or Loss of Voice in Clergymen; given after or in alternation
with =No. 1=. Chronic Bronchitis or Laryngitis, with Cough. Hoarseness,
Loss of Voice or Weak Voice, Scanty Expectoration. Often used in
alternation with =No. 1=, especially if there is heat or fever.

=No. 8=—=For Neuralgia, Toothache, Faceache, Nervous Pains=, Toothache
in Sound Teeth, or in Old Decayed Teeth; Toothache in Children;
Faceache; Tic Douloureux; Swelled Face; Darting, Sharp or Stinging
Pains; Neuralgic Pains; Old Neuralgia.

=No. 9=—=For Headaches, Vertigo, Sick Headaches, Congestion= to the
=Head=; Bilious Headaches; Nervous Headaches and Sick Headaches, with
Nausea and Vomiting; Congestive Headaches, also =No. 1=; Vertigo or
Dizziness; Swimming of the Head; Heat Heaviness or Fullness of the Head,
also =No. 1=. Often used in alternation with =No. 1=, for Congestive
Headaches, or with =No. 10= for Bilious Headaches.

=No. 10=—=For Dyspepsia, Indigestion, Constipation and Bilious
Complaints=; Weak Stomach, rising of Food; Water Brash, Coated Tongue,
Loss of Appetite, Loathing of Food; Constipation, or Costive Bowels;
Scanty, Knotty, Small Hard Dry or Insufficient Stools, Biliousness
Yellow or Earthy Complexion; Bad Taste in the Mouth; No Appetite,
Drowsiness, and Costive Bowels, Acid Stomach, Everything eaten becomes
Sour; Old Chronic Dyspepsia, when everything disagrees; Headache from
Indigestion; Chronic Constipation; Flatulence and Bloating of the
Abdomen after eating.

=No. 11=—=For Female Irregularities=; =Delaying, Scanty or Painful
Menses=; Delaying or too Tardy or Late-appearing Menses; Suppressed or
Obstructed Menses, from cold, fright, weakness or morbid cause; too
Scanty, too Pale, or Colorless Menses; Green Sickness or Chlorosis;
Headache or Colic Pains during the Menses; Intermitting or Irregular
Menses; Leucorrhea, with Scanty or Delayed Menses.

=No. 12=—=For Whites, or Leucorrhea=; =Too Profuse Menses=; yellowish,
thick, offensive or corrosive discharge; Menses too soon and too long
continued; too profuse and debilitating Menses; Constant Bearing Down;
Old Debilitating Leucorrhea.

=No. 13=—=For Croup=; =Hoarse Cough, Oppressed Breathing=; Horse, Croupy
Cough; Inflammatory Croup; Spasmodic Croup, with Quick Pulse, Hot Skin,
Difficult, Labored Breathing and Hoarse Cough; Laryngitis, with
hoarseness, Pain in the Throat, Painful Cough and Scanty Expectoration;
Loss of Voice.

=No. 14=—=For Eczema, Eruptions, Salt Rheum, Acne, Ulcers=;
=Erysipelas=, with Hot, Smooth, Swelled Skin or Blisters; Salt Rheum or
Rough, Scaly, Chapped Eruption on the Hands or other parts; Pimples or
Blotches on the Face; Prickly Heat; Nettle Rash, like Stings of Insects;
Scald Head.

=No. 15=—=For Rheumatism=; =Lameness, Stiffness and Soreness=; Acute
Rheumatism, with Painful, Hot Swelling of the part; Chronic Rheumatism,
with Lameness, Stiffness and Soreness of the part; Sciatic Rheumatism,
with pain in the Hip, Knee or Leg of the affected side; Lumbago, or pain
across the Loins or Back; Old Rheumatic Pains or Lameness. In
alternation with =No. 1=, for the acute form; and in alternation with
=No. 10= for Chronic Rheumatism.

=No. 16=—=For Malaria, Fever and Ague, Dumb Ague, Intermitting Fever,
Malarial Fevers=; Effects of Malaria; Old suppressed Agues.

=No. 17=—=For Piles and Hemorrhoids, Blind or Bleeding, Internal or
External=, with Fullness, Itching and Burning; Inflamed, Hot, Burning,
Sore Tumors around the Rectum; Falling of the Rectum; Itching of the
Anus.

Apply Humphreys’ _Witch Hazel Ointment (Comp.)_ externally.

=No. 18=—=For Sore Eyes=; Old Chronic, Sore, Inflamed or Weak Eyes, with
Heat, Redness, Scalding Tears, and Dread of Light; Painful, Red,
Inflamed Eyelids with constant secretion of Mucus; Acute Inflamed Eyes
or Eyelids. Also for Easy Fatigue of the eyes, from reading or effort;
Intolerance of Light.

=No. 19=—=For Catarrh, Dry or Flowing, Recent or Chronic=; =Influenza=;
Mucus Discharges from the Nose; Acute Catarrh, with flow of Scalding
Mucus, Tears and Sneezing; Old Chronic Catarrhs, with profuse discharge
of Thick, sometimes Offensive Mucus, Obstructed Nose, and often Loss of
Taste or Smell; Chronic Cold in the Head; Catarrh of Children: Offensive
Breath with Catarrh; Cough, with Profuse discharge from the Nose, and
Copious Expectoration; Loose Catarrhal Cough in Children; Soreness, or
Dry Crusts forming in the Nose, with dry or Moist Catarrh.

=No. 20=—=For Whooping Cough=; =Irritating, Spasmodic and Convulsive
Coughs=. Given early arrests the development of the Cough; and given at
any stage; allays the irritation, moderates the Cough.

=No. 21=—=For Asthma, Difficult Breathing, Cough and Expectoration=; Old
Chronic Asthma, with attacks of Oppressed, Labored, Difficult Breathing,
Cough and Expectoration; Dry Asthma; Humid Asthma; Stridulous or Sighing
Respiration.

=No. 22=—=For Ear Discharges=; =Earache=; =Diseases of the Ear=; =Noise
in the Head, Discharges= from the Ear, in consequence of Measles,
Scarlatina or other diseases; Inflammation of the Internal Ear; Old
Offensive Discharges from the Ear, Noises, Buzzing Ringing or Piping in
the Ears.

=No. 23=—=For Enlarged Glands or Tonsils=; Enlarged or Inflamed Glands
under the Jaw, around the Neck or under the Arm-pits; Itching and
Burning of the Legs.

=No. 24=—=Tonic Tablets for General Debility=; =A General Tonic for Loss
of Appetite, Impaired or Weak Digestion=; =Physical and Nervous
Weakness=; Want of Strength, Lassitude, Tired, Weary Feeling, even on
Waking; Easy Fatigue: Sweat on going to Sleep; Debility, the result of
severe illness or drain upon the system; Want of Tone or Iron in the
Blood. An invaluable remedy for persons under severe mental or physical
strain, or over-work, or the debility resulting from it.

=No. 25=—=For Dropsy, Fluid Accumulations with Scanty Secretions=;
Anasarca or General Dropsy; Dropsy of the Abdomen; Dropsy of the Chest,
Heart or Head; Dropsy with Tumid, Doughy Swellings and Scanty
Secretions; Dropsical Swelling of the Feet or Legs.

=No. 26=—=For Nausea and Vomiting=; Sea-Sickness and Sickness from
Riding in Carriage, Railroads, Automobiles; Headache from Carriage or
Car Riding.

=No. 27=—=For Disorders of the Kidney and Urinary System.= Painful,
Retarded, Scanty Urination; Catarrh of the bladder in alternation with
the =No. 30=; Sand and Unhealthy Deposits in the Urine; Thick, Turbid,
Frothy Urine filled with mucus and brick-dust deposits; Too Frequent
Discharge of Urine; Nightly Enuresis; Pain in the region of the Kidney
and Bladder; Difficult, Slow, Interrupted and Insufficient Discharge in
old people; Bloody Urine or mixed with blood. Compare also =No. 30=.

=No. 28=—=For Nervous Prostration or Neurasthenia.=—A general condition
of Neurasthenia or Nervous Prostration, want of energy, low spirits with
backache, headache, etc. Lack of tone of the nervous system with
sluggishness of the mind; difficult mental concentration; absent
mindness; extreme nervous condition from anxiety, worry, business
strain, overstudy, etc. Functional weakness of various organs.

☞=N. B.=—=Packages of Three Flasks of Pills and One Flask of Powder and
One of Tonic Tablets.=—Powder to be taken each morning while the pills
are taken noon and night, and the =Tonic Tablets= taken before each
meal.

=No. 29=—=For Sore Mouth or Canker=; Fever Blisters, Cold Sores on the
Lips; Ulcerated Lips; Sore Mouth or Canker in adults, children or
infants; Nursing Sore Mouth; Morning Sickness of expectant Women;
Indigestion; Ulceration or Canker of the Mouth.

=No. 30=—=For Diseases of the Urinary Organs=; Urinary Incontinence;
Frequent, Painful or Scalding Urination; Inability to retain the Urine;
Catarrh of the Bladder; in alternation with =No. 27=; Frequent Scalding
Urination, with Mucus Discharge; Urine loaded with Mucus; Nightly
Wetting the Bed in children; Nocturnal Urinary incontinence. =No. 30= is
to the bladder and passages what =No. 27= is to the kidneys—hence so
often used in connection.

=No. 31=—=For Painful Menstruation=; Spasms, Hysteria, Pruritus;
Menstruation with Painful Bearing Down; Menses, with Painful, Pressive,
Cutting, Griping, and even Spasms; Too Profuse Menses, with Pain and
Distress; Itching and Burning Irritation of the Organs; Laughing,
Crying, Hysterical Movements, or Cramps at the monthly period; Too Early
and Too Long continued Menses; Leucorrhea, like white of eggs.

=No. 32=—=For Disorders of the Heart=, Palpitations, Flushes;
Irregularities occurring at the Critical Age of Women, on Change of
Life; Flushes of Heat; Irregular Menses, Wanting or Too Soon, Too
Copious and Too Long, with great prostration, nervous and wakeful at the
turn of life; Palpitation of the Heart; Irregular or Tumultuous Beating
of the Heart; Violent Throbbing or Irregular Beating of the Heart;
Painful Spasms through the Chest and Heart; Rheumatism of the Heart; Old
Chronic Palpitations of the Heart.

=No. 33=—=For Cramps, Spasms, Convulsions=; Convulsions of children or
adults with Loss of Consciousness; Spasms or Convulsions of children
from the slightest cause; Convulsions of children from Teething, Fright
or Mental Excitement; Cramps or Spasms of single limbs; St. Vitus’
Dance, with Twitching, Jerking or Strange Motions of single features,
muscles or parts; Hysterical Spasms of Hysteria; Easy Numbness of single
parts.

=No. 34=—=For Sore Throat and Quinsy=; Ulcerated Sore Throat,
Tonsilitis, Ulcerated or Enlarged Tonsils; Painful, Difficult, Impeded
Deglutition.

=No. 35=—=For Chronic Congestions=; =Headaches and Eruptions=; Habitual
Headaches; Heat and Fullness of the Head; Headaches of children;
Difficult Teething of children; Scurf and Eruption on the Head of young
children; Liability to Take Cold from Slight Exposure.

=No. 40=—=For Insomnia, Sleeplessness, Wakefulness, Restlessness and
Nervousness.=—Fullness or beating in the head, or red face, such as
people of full habit are subject to, and from Indigestion.

=Number “40”= induces repose, and natural, refreshing sleep.

No Narcotic, No Opiate, No Dope, No habit forming Drugs, Strictly
Homeopathic.

Take six pellets at bed time, or hourly, if wakeful during the night. A
cracker or glass of milk at bed time, draws the blood from the head,
accelerating the action of =Number “40.”=

=No. 77=—=For Grip, Grippe, La Grippe, Influenza, Hay Fever=; Flowing
Eyes and Nose, Coryza; Sneezing, Cough; Feverishness, Restlessness,
Irritability; Heat or Dryness of Throat, Thirst; Pain and Soreness in
Head, Back and Lungs; General Prostration and Despondency. For La
Grippe, or Epidemic Influenza. Colds which are obstinate, that “hang on”
and do not yield to treatment, find relief from =No. 77=. For extreme
fever, alternate with =No. 1=; for Violent Cough or Chest Pains,
alternate with =No. 7=. But in general, the =No. 77= is sufficient.

FIRST SYMPTOMS.—_Coryza_, or nasal irritation or discharge, _cough_,
sore throat; _headache_, _backache_; and general depression.

MORE SERIOUS SYMPTOMS.—_Pain in head, back, chest, or limbs_, sometimes
of sudden and prostrating _neuralgic_ character; sometimes _cerebral
excitement_; even delirium; extreme _prostration, languor or debility,
depression of mind_, even after the first violence of the attack has
passed away; _bronchitis or broncho-pneumonia_ may become serious
complications.

“ROSE,” “HAY,” “AUTUMN” OR “PEACH” CATARRH.—For this, to which some
persons are remarkably susceptible (coming on _annually_, generally
between 20th of August and 1st of October), =No. 77= is an invaluable
remedy. Taken early, days before the attack, continued persistently four
times a day, it relieves the sneezing, lacrymation and asthma; and _by
its continued use, from season to season_, tends to lesson the liability
of the disease.

Moderation in the use of coffee and tobacco; avoidance of exposure;
keeping warm and using only light and easily digestible food, will
greatly aid the beneficent action of =No. 77=.

=No. 24 Tonic Tablets= will be found beneficial after an attack.




                                 INDEX


 Abortion, in horses, 121

 Abortion, in cattle, 178

 Abortion, in sheep and goats, 205

 Abscess, in horse, 17

 Abscess, in dog, 219

 Abscess, of the ears, 230

 Abscess, of the poll, 18

 Actinomycosis, in horses, 128

 Actinomycosis, in cattle, 142

 Action and structure of the heart, 65

 Albugo, or spot in the eye, 61

 Alternation of remedies, 10

 Amaurosis, in horses, 61

 Amaurosis, in dogs, 227

 Anemic palpitation, 74

 Aneurism, 77

 Angina, 232

 Anthrax, in horses, 131

 Anthrax, in cattle, 141

 Apoplexy, in horses, 79

 Apoplexy, in sheep and goats, 193

 Apoplexy, in dogs, 222

 Appetite, excessive, 163

 Appetite, loss of, in horses, 105

 Appetite, loss of, in poultry, 266

 Articular cartilage, ulceration of the, 49

 Aspergillosis, 258

 Asthma, 234

 Atrophy of the heart, 72

 Azoturia, 129


 Bearing, inflammation of the, 206

 Bees, Hornets, etc., stings of, 44

 Big jaw, in horses, 128

 Big jaw, in cattle, 142

 Bites, frost, 263

 Biting crib, 105

 Blackhead, 258

 Bladder, inflammation of the, in horses, 116

 Bladder, inflammation of the, in cattle, 170

 Bladder, inflammation of the, in dogs, 247

 Black leg, in cattle, 133

 Black leg, in sheep, 189

 Black Tongue, 221

 Black Water, 142

 Blind Staggers, 80

 Blood poisoning, 125

 Bloody urine, in horses, 116

 Bloody urine, in cattle, 170

 Blotch, 250

 Blown, in cattle, 157

 Blown, in sheep and goats, 200

 Boils, 251

 Bones, caries of the, 186

 Bots, 113

 Boulimia, 163

 Bound bowels, in horses, 112

 Bound bowels, in dogs, 242

 Bound, crop, 261

 Bound, egg, 262

 Bowels, bound, in horses, 112

 Bowels, bound, in dogs, 242

 Bowels, inflammation of the, in horses, 109

 Bowels, inflammation of the, in cattle, 165

 Bowels, inflammation of the, in sheep and goats, 202

 Bowels, inflammation of the, in dogs, 240

 Brain, inflammation of the, in horses, 81

 Brain, inflammation of the, in sheep and goats, 193

 Brooder pneumonia, 258

 Broken knee, 43

 Broken wind, 93

 Bronchitis, in horses, 95

 Bronchitis, in cattle, 147

 Bronchitis, in sheep and goats, 198

 Bronchitis, in dogs, 233

 Bronchitis, in poultry, 259

 Bronchitis, from worms, 150

 Bruise, 181

 Brushing, or cutting, 42

 Bumble Foot, 259

 Burns, 181


 Calving, cleaning after, 173

 Calving, dropping after, 175

 Calving, flooding after, 173

 Cancer, 221

 Canine madness, 224

 Canker, external, 230

 Canker, in the ear, 229

 Canker, in the mouth, 237

 Canker and Thrush, 59

 Capped elbow, 35

 Capped hock, 36

 Care and housing of sick animals, 13

 Caries, of the bones, 186

 Cataract, in horses, 62

 Cataract, in dogs, 228

 Catarrh, Gastro-Duodinal, 245

 Catarrh, in horse, 88

 Catarrh, in cattle, 145

 Catarrh, in sheep and goats, 197

 Catarrh, in dogs, 232

 Cattle, diseases of, 133–188

 Charbon, 131

 Chest, founder, 217

 Chest, inflammation of the, in horses, 98

 Chest, inflammation of the, in dogs, 235

 Chill, 87

 Chirp, 268

 Choking, in cattle, 183

 Choking, in dogs, 246

 Cholera, Hog, 255

 Cholera, or “Skitt” in young calves, 161

 Cholera, in poultry, 260

 Choose the remedy, how to, 11

 Chorea, 224

 Chronic rheumatism, 124

 Circulatory system, diseases of the, 65–78

 Cistitis, in horses, 116

 Cistitis, in cattle, 170

 Cistitis, in dogs, 247

 Cleaning after calving, 173

 Cold, in horses, 88

 Cold, in cattle, 145

 Cold, in sheep and goats, 197

 Cold, in dogs, 232

 Cold, in the head, 145

 Colic and enteritis, difference between, 202

 Colic, in horses, 106

 Colic, in cattle, 156, 166

 Colic, in sheep and goats, 201

 Colic, in dogs, 239

 Colic, red, 109

 Colic, wind, 108

 Constipation, in cattle, 157

 Constipation, in sheep and goats, 203

 Constipation, in dogs, 242

 Consumption, 151

 Contused wounds, in horses, 29

 Contused wounds, in cattle, 181

 Convulsions, in cattle, 138

 Cornea, opacity of the, 61

 Corns, 54

 Coryza, in cattle, 145

 Coryza, in dogs, 232

 Costiveness, 112

 Cough, in horses, 93

 Cough, in cattle, 147

 Cough, in sheep and goats, 197

 Cough, in dogs, 236

 Crack, sand, quarter, 53

 Cramps, 261

 Crib-biting, 105

 Crop, bound, 261

 Cud, loss of the, 155

 Curb, 36

 Cutting or brushing, 42


 Deafness, 230

 Dentition, 103

 Diaphragm, spasm of the, (hiccough), 75–76

 Diaphragm, spasm of the, (palpitation), 75–76

 Diarrhea, in cattle, 160–161

 Diarrhea, in sheep and goats, 202

 Diarrhea, in dogs, 241

 Diarrhea and dysentery (scouring) in poultry, 261

 Diarrhea, white, 269

 Diet, of sick animals, 13

 Digestive organs, diseases of the, in horses, 103–114

 Digestive organs, diseases of the, in cattle, 153–168

 Digestive organs, diseases of the, in sheep & goats, 200–204

 Digestive organs, diseases of the, in dogs, 237–246

 Dilatation, of the heart, 73

 Dipping, scab and ticks, 211–214

 Diseases of Horses, 17–132

 Diseases of Cattle, 133–188

 Diseases of Sheep and Goats, 189–214

 Diseases of the Dog, 215–256

 Diseases of Swine and Hogs, 255–256

 Diseases of Poultry, 257–270

 Dislocations, Sprains or Strains, 39–42

 Distemper, in horses, 90

 Distemper, in dogs, 215

 Distentions from Gas, 200

 Distentions from impacted food, 200

 Diuresis, 118

 Dizziness, 195

 Docking, 37

 Dog, diseases of the, 215–256

 Doses, how much, 9

 Doses and preparing Remedies, in poultry, 257

 Doses and preparing Remedies, in sheep & goats, 189

 Dropping after calving, 175

 Dropsy, in horses, 20

 Dropsy, in sheep and goats, 203

 Dropsy, in dogs, 218

 Dropsy, of the heart, 67

 Drum-belly, in horses, 108

 Drum-belly, in cattle, 157

 Dry Murrain, 163

 Dysentery, 241

 Dysentery and diarrhea (scouring) in poultry, 261

 Dysentery—Johnes Disease, 162


 Ears, abscess of the, 230

 Ear, canker in the, 229

 Ears, eyes, nose, etc., diseases of the, 227–231

 Eating feathers, 263

 Eczema, in horses, 21

 Eczema, in cattle, 187

 Eczema, epizootica, in cattle, 134

 Eczema epizootica, in sheep and goats, 190

 Eczema, in dogs, 250

 Eczema of the eyelids, 228

 Egg bound, 262

 Eggs, soft, 269

 Elbow, capped, 35

 Embolism, 76

 Emissions, seminal, 119

 Encephalitis, 193

 Endocarditis, 69

 Enlargement of the heart, 71

 Enteritis and colic, difference between, 202

 Enteritis, in horses, 109

 Enteritis, in cattle, 165–166

 Enteritis, in sheep and goats, 202

 Enteritis, in dogs, 240

 Enteritis—gastro, 164

 Epilepsy, in horses, 79

 Epilepsy, in cattle, 138

 Epilepsy, in sheep and goats, 194

 Epilepsy, in dogs, 223

 Epizootica, eczema, in cattle, 134

 Epizootica, eczema, in sheep and goats, 190

 Esophagus, foreign bodies in the, 246

 Excessive appetite, 163

 Extremities and skin, diseases of the, 250–254

 External canker, 230

 Eye, Albugo or spot in the, 61

 Eyes, diseases of the, in horses, 61–64

 Eyes, ears, nose, etc., diseases of the, 227–231

 Eyelids, eczema of the, 228

 Eye, inflammation of the, in horses, 62

 Eye, inflammation of the, in cattle, 138

 Eye, inflammation of the, in dogs, 227

 Eye, injuries to the, 64

 Eye, pink, 90


 Failure to come in heat, in horses, 120

 Failure to come in heat, in cattle, 172

 Falling and protrusion of the womb, 179

 Fardel bound, 163

 Farcy, 125

 Feather eating, 263

 Feet and Legs, diseases of the, 45–60

 Feet, inflammation of the, 46

 Feet, sore, 254

 Fetlock, sprains of the, 40

 Fever, 125

 Fever, milk, 175

 Fever, puerperal, 175

 Fever, simple or inflammatory, 216

 Fever, swamp, 125

 Filaria Immitis, 245

 Fistulas, 17

 Fistula Lachrymalis, 229

 Fistula of the withers, 19

 Fits, in horse, 79

 Fits, in cattle, 138

 Fits, in sheep and goats, 194

 Fits, in dogs, 223

 Flanks, heaving of the, 157

 Flea, 252

 Flooding after calving, 173

 Flukes, in cattle, 168

 Flukes, in sheep and goats, 203

 Fly, 210

 Foot and Mouth Disease, in cattle, 134

 Foot and Mouth Disease, in sheep and goats, 190

 Foot, bumble, 259

 Foot, prick in the, 55

 Foot-Rot, in cattle, 139

 Foot-Rot, in sheep and goats, 207

 Foreign bodies in the Esophagus, 246

 Formation of joints, 48

 Foul, in the foot, 139

 Founder, in horses, 46

 Founder, in sheep and goats, 204

 Fractures, in horses, 37–39

 Fractures, in cattle, 186

 Fractures, in dogs, 254

 Fractures, in poultry, 263

 Frost bites, 263

 Furuncles, 251


 Gadfly, 209

 Gapes, 264

 Garget, in cattle, 174

 Garget, in sheep and goats, 206

 Gastritis, in cattle, 164

 Gastritis, in dogs, 240

 Gastro-duodinal catarrh, 245

 Gastro-enteritis, 164

 General diseases, in horses, 123–132

 General diseases, in cattle, 133–144

 General diseases, in sheep and goats, 189–192

 General diseases, in dogs, 215–221

 Gid, 195

 Giddiness, 265

 Give the remedy, how to, 11

 Glanders, 125

 Gleet, 248

 Gleet, nasal, 97

 Goats and Sheep, diseases of, 189–214

 Gonorrhea, 248

 Gout, 265

 Grain-sick, 157

 Gripes, 201

 Grippe, 88

 Gutta Serena, in horses, 61

 Gutta Serena, in dogs, 227


 Haunch, sprain of the, 183

 Haunch, sprains of the muscles of the, 41

 Haw, the, 63

 Head and Nervous System, diseases of the, 222–226

 Head, cold in the, 145

 Heart, atrophy of the, 72

 Heart, dilatation of the, 73

 Heart, dropsy of the, 67

 Heart, enlargement of the, 71

 Heart, structure and action of the, 65

 Heat, failure to come in, in horses, 120

 Heat, failure to come in, in cattle, 172

 Heaves, 93

 Heaving of the flanks, 157

 Hematuria, in horses, 116

 Hematuria, in cattle, 170

 Hemoglobinuria, 142

 Hemorrhage, 254

 Hide bound, in horses, 22

 Hide bound, in cattle, 140

 Hints for Practice, 15

 Hip joint lameness, 41

 Hock, capped, 36

 Hock, sprain of the, 41

 Hog cholera, 255

 Hogs and swine, diseases of, 255–256

 Hoose, 145

 Hoove, in cattle, 157

 Hoove, in sheep and goats, 200

 Hornets, bees, etc., stings of, 44

 Horses, diseases of, 17–132

 Horse distemper, 90

 Horse, lameness in, 45

 Housing and care of sick animals, 13

 How often to give the remedy, 10

 How to choose the remedy, 11

 How to give the remedy, 11

 How to feel the pulse, 14

 Hydrophobia, 195

 Hypertrophy, 71


 Ill condition, 106

 Impaction of the omasum, 163

 Impotence in stallions, 119

 Incised wounds, in horses, 30

 Incised wounds, in cattle, 184

 Indigestion, in horses, 106

 Indigestion, in dogs, 238

 Indigestion, in poultry, 266

 Inflammation of bronchial tubes, horses, 95

 Inflammation of bronchial tubes, cattle, 147

 Inflammation of bronchial tubes, sheep and goats, 198

 Inflammation of the bearing, 206

 Inflammation of the bladder, in horses, 116

 Inflammation of the bladder, in cattle, 170

 Inflammation of the bladder, in dogs, 247

 Inflammation of the bowels, in horses, 109

 Inflammation of the bowels, in cattle, 165

 Inflammation of the bowels, in sheep and goats, 202

 Inflammation of the bowels, in dogs, 240

 Inflammation of the brain, in horses, 81

 Inflammation of the brain, in sheep and goats, 193

 Inflammation of the chest, in horses, 98

 Inflammation of the chest, in dogs, 235

 Inflammation of the eye, in horses, 62

 Inflammation of the eye, in cattle, 138

 Inflammation of the eye, in dogs, 227

 Inflammation of the feet, 46

 Inflammation of the kidneys, in horses, 115

 Inflammation of the kidneys, in cattle, 169

 Inflammation of the larynx, 96

 Inflammation of the lungs, in cattle, 149

 Inflammation of the lungs, in sheep and goats, 199

 Inflammation of the lymphatics, 127

 Inflammation of the peritoneum, in horses, 111

 Inflammation of the peritoneum, in cattle, 167

 Inflammation of the stomach, in cattle, 164

 Inflammation of the stomach, in dogs, 240

 Inflammation of the teats, 249

 Inflammation of the udder, in cattle, 174

 Inflammation of the udder, in sheep and goats, 206

 Inflammatory or simple fever, 216

 Influenza, 90

 Injuries and wounds, mechanical, in horses, 29–44

 Injuries and wounds, mechanical, in cattle, 181–188

 Injuries and wounds, mechanical, in dogs, 250–254

 Injuries to the eye, 64

 Inversion of the womb, 248

 Irregular teeth, in horses, 103

 Irregular teeth, in cattle, 164


 Jagged wounds, or lacerated, 31

 Jaundice, in horses, 112

 Jaundice, in dogs, 245

 Johnes disease—dysentery, 162

 Joint disease, navicular, 52

 Joints, formation of, 48


 Kennel lameness, 217

 Kidneys, inflammation of the, in horses, 115

 Kidneys, inflammation of the, in cattle, 169

 Knee, broken, 43


 Lacerated wounds, in horses, 31

 Lacerated wounds, in cattle, 185

 Laceration of the tongue, 34

 Lacteal tumors, 220

 Lameness, hip joint, 41

 Lameness, in horses, 45

 Lameness, in sheep and goats, 207

 Laminitis, 46

 Lampas, 104

 Laryngitis, in horses, 96

 Laryngitis, in sheep and goats, 198

 Larynx, inflammation of the, 96

 Legs and feet, diseases of, 45–60

 Legs, scaly, 262

 Legs, swelled, 24

 Leg weakness, 265

 Lice, in horses, 25

 Lice, in poultry, 265

 Liver disease, in horses, 112

 Liver disease, in poultry, 266

 Liver fluke disease, 192

 Liver rot, in sheep and goats, 192

 Lock-jaw, 82

 Locomotion and skin, diseases of, 207–210

 Loins, sprain of the, 183

 Loss of appetite, in horses, 105

 Loss of appetite, in poultry, 266

 Loss of the cud, 155

 Louping ill, 194

 Louse, 252

 Lumbago, in cattle, 137

 Lungs, inflammation of, in horses, 98

 Lungs, inflammation of, in cattle, 149

 Lungs, inflammation of, in sheep and goats, 199

 Luxation of the patella, or stifle, 40

 Lymphatics, inflammation of the, 127


 Madness, in sheep and goats, 195

 Madness, in dogs, 224

 Mad staggers, 81

 Mange, in horses, 23

 Mange, in cows, 140

 Mange, in dogs, 253

 Mares, parturition in, 118

 Maw-bound, in cattle, 157

 Maw-bound, in sheep and goats, 200

 Mechanical injuries and wounds, in horses, 29–44

 Mechanical injuries and wounds, in cattle, 181–188

 Mechanical injuries and wounds, in dogs, 250–254

 Megrims, 80

 Methods of preparing remedies, in poultry, 257

 Methods of preparing remedies, in sheep and goats, 189

 Milk fever, 175

 Moulting, 267

 Mouth and foot disease, in cattle, 134

 Mouth and foot disease, in sheep and goats, 190

 Mouth, canker in the, 237

 Murrain, dry, 163

 Muscles, of the haunch, sprain of the, 41

 Muscles, sprain of the psoas, 40


 Nasal gleet, 97

 Navicular joint disease, 52

 Nephritis, in horses, 115

 Nephritis, in cattle, 169

 Nephritis, in dogs, 247

 Nervous system and head, diseases of, in dogs, 222–226

 Nervous system, diseases of, in horses, 79–86

 Nervous system, diseases of, in sheep and goats, 193–196

 Nibblers, 194

 Nose, eyes, ears, etc., diseases of, in dogs, 227–231

 Nose, ulceration of the, 231


 Omasum, impaction of the, 163

 Opacity of the cornea, 61

 Ophthalmia, in horses, 62

 Ophthalmia, in cattle, 138

 Ophthalmia, in dogs, 227

 Organs of generation, diseases of, in sheep, 205–206

 Over-reach and tread, 42–43


 Palpitation, 74

 Palpitation, anemic, 74

 Palsy, 222

 Paralysis, in horses, 81

 Paralysis, in dogs, 222

 Parturition, in cattle, 171

 Parturition, in mares, 118

 Patella, luxation of the, or stifle, 40

 Pericarditis, 67

 Peritoneum, inflammation of the, in horses, 111

 Peritoneum, inflammation of the, in cattle, 167

 Peritonitis, in horses, 111

 Peritonitis, in cattle, 167

 Pharyngitis, 146

 Phrenitis, 81

 Pink Eye, 90

 Pip, 268

 Plants, poisonous, 186

 Pleurisy, in horses, 98

 Pleurisy, in cattle, 148

 Pleurisy, in dogs, 235

 Pneumonia, brooder, 258

 Pneumonia, in horses, 98

 Pneumonia, in cattle, 149

 Pneumonia, in sheep and goats, 199

 Pneumonia, in dogs, 235

 Pock, 208

 Poisonous plants, 186

 Poll, abscess of the, 18

 Poll evil, 18

 Poultry, diseases of, 257–270

 Poultry, doses and methods of preparing remedies, 257

 Prick in the foot, 55

 Preparing remedies, for use, in sheep and goats, 189

 Preparing remedies, for use, in poultry, 257

 Protrusion and falling of the womb, 179

 Psoas muscles, sprain of the, 40

 Pterygium, 228

 Puerperal Fever, 175

 Puffs, 50

 Pulse, directions for feeling, 14

 Punctured wounds, 33

 Purpura Hemorrhagica, 127


 Quarter Crack, 53

 Quittor, 56


 Rabies, in sheep and goats, 195

 Rabies, in dogs, 224

 Red colic, 109

 Red water, 142

 Remedies, alternation of, 10

 Remedies, doses and preparing, in sheep and goats, 189

 Remedies, doses and preparing, in poultry, 257

 Remedies, how to choose, 11

 Remedies, how to give, 11

 Repetitions, how often, 10

 Reproductive and urinary organs, in horses, 115–122

 Reproductive and urinary organs, in cattle, 169–180

 Reproductive organs, in sheep, 205–206

 Respiratory organs, diseases of, in horses, 87–102

 Respiratory organs, diseases of, in cattle, 145–152

 Respiratory organs, diseases of, in sheep—goats, 197–199

 Respiratory organs, diseases of, in dogs, 232–236

 Retention of urine, 117

 Rheumatism, chronic, 124

 Rheumatism, in horses, 123

 Rheumatism, in cattle, 137

 Rheumatism, in sheep and goats, 207

 Rheumatism, in dogs, 217

 Rheumatism, in poultry, 265

 Ring bone, 59

 Ringworm, 25

 Rottenness, in cattle, 168

 Rottenness, in sheep and goats, 203

 Roup, 268

 Rumination, in cattle, 153


 Sand crack, 53

 Saddle Galls, 34

 Salivation, in horses, 114

 Salivation, in dogs, 237

 Scab, ticks and dipping, 211–214

 Scaly legs, 262

 Scanty urination, in horses, 117

 Scanty urination, in cattle, 169

 Scouring, 160

 Scouring, diarrhea and dysentery, in poultry, 261

 Seedy toe, 51

 Self-abuse, 119

 Seminal emissions, 119

 Serous cyst, in horses, 34

 Serous cyst, in dogs, 230

 Sexual vigor, weak or deficient, 119

 Sick animals, diet of, 13

 Sick animals, housing and care, 13

 Simple or inflammatory fever, 216

 Sitfast, 34

 Skin and extremities, diseases of, in dogs, 250–254

 Skin and locomotion, diseases of, in sheep, 207–210

 Skin diseases, 17–28

 Skitt or cholera, in young calves, 161

 Slavering, 114

 Soft eggs, 269

 Sore feet, 254

 Sore Throat, in cattle, 146

 Sore Throat, in dogs, 232

 Spasm of the diaphragm (palpitation), 75–76

 Spavin, 57

 Speedy-cut, 42

 Spinal Meningitis, 85

 Splint, 58

 Sponge, 26

 Spot in the eye or albugo, 61

 Sprains, in cattle, 182–183

 Sprains or strains, in horses, 39–42

 Staggers, 195

 Staking, 35

 Staling, too profuse, 118

 Stallions, impotence in, 119

 Sterility, in horses, 120

 Sterility, in cattle, 172

 Stifle joint, sprain of the, 41

 Stifle or luxation of the patella, 40

 Stings of bees, hornets, etc., 44

 Stomach, inflammation of the, in cattle, 164

 Stomach, inflammation of the, in dogs, 240

 Stomatitis, 162

 Strains or sprains, 39–42

 Structure and action of the heart, 65

 Sturdy, 195

 St. Vitus’ Dance, 224

 Suppressed or scanty urination, 169

 Surfeit, 250

 Swamp fever, 125

 Sweating, 26

 Swelled legs, 24

 Swellings, 27

 Swelling of the teats, 25

 Sweeny, 19

 Swine and hogs, diseases of, 255–256

 Synovitis, 49


 Teats, inflammation of the, 249

 Teats, sore, 174

 Teats, swelling of the, 25

 Teeth, diseases of the, 238

 Teething, difficult, 103

 Teeth, irregular, in horses, 103

 Teeth, irregular, in cattle, 164

 Tetanus, 82

 Texas fever, 142

 Tick, 252

 Ticks, scab and dipping, 211–214

 Thick wind, 95

 Thread worm, (Filaria Immitis), 245

 Throat, sore, in cattle, 146

 Throat, sore, in dogs, 232

 Throat worms, 264

 Thrush and canker, 59

 Toe seedy, 51

 Tongue, black, 221

 Tongue, lacerated, 34

 Treads and overreaches, 42–43

 Trotters, 194

 True spasm of the diaphragm (hiccough), 75–76

 Tubercles, 26

 Tuberculosis, in cattle, 151

 Tuberculosis, in poultry, 260

 Tumors, in horses, 27

 Tumors, in dogs, 219

 Tumors, lacteal, 220

 Turn-sick, 195

 Tympanitis, in horses, 108

 Tympanitis in cattle, 157

 Tympanitis, in sheep and goats, 200


 Udder, inflammation of the, in cattle, 174

 Udder, inflammation of the, in sheep and goats, 206

 Ulcers, 17

 Ulceration of articular cartilage, 49

 Ulceration of the nose, 231

 Urinary and generative system, diseases of, in dogs, 247–249

 Urinary and reproductive organs, in horses, 115–122

 Urinary and reproductive organs, in cattle, 169–180

 Urine, bloody, in horses, 116

 Urine, bloody, in cattle, 170

 Urine, retention of, 117

 Urine, scanty, in horses, 117

 Urine, scanty, in cattle, 169


 Varicose veins, 77

 Veins, varicose, 77

 Vertigo, 80

 Vomiting, 239


 Warbles, in horses, 34

 Warbles, in cattle, 188

 Warts, 28

 Weed, 127

 Weak or deficient sexual vigor, 119

 Weakness, leg, 265

 Whistles, 93

 White diarrhea, 269

 Wind, broken, 93

 Wind-colic, 108

 Windgalls, 50

 Wind, thick, 93

 Withers, fistula of the, 19

 Womb, falling and protrusion of the, 179

 Womb, inversion of the, 248

 Worms, bronchitis from, 150

 Worms, in horses, 113

 Worms, in dogs, 242

 Worms, thread, 245

 Worms, throat, 264

 Wounds and injuries, mechanical, in horses, 29–44

 Wounds and injuries, mechanical, in cattle, 181–188


 Yellows, 112


Humphreys’ Remedies for Family Use see pages 279 to 285.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                LIST OF

[Illustration: [Horse]]

                               HUMPHREYS’
                          VETERINARY REMEDIES


                                                                  Price
                                                                    of
                                                                  Single
                                                                  Bottle

   =A.A.= =For Fevers, Congestions and Inflammations=, as of the
          Lungs or Pleura, Inflammation of the Head or Brain,
          Eyes, or of the Liver or Belly; Sore Throat or Quinsy;
          Blind or Belly Staggers, or Convulsions; Hot Skin;
          Quick Pulse; Chill or Panting; Milk Fever in Cows        =.60=

   =B.B.= =For Diseases of the Tendons, Ligaments=, or Joints;
          Founder, Curb, Strains, Stiffness, Lameness,
          Rheumatism, Splint, Stifle                               =.60=

   =C.C.= =For Diseases of the Glands, Epizootic=, Distemper in
          Horses or Sheep; Nasal Gleet; Discharges from the Nose;
          Swelled Glands; Scab in Sheep; Distemper in Dogs         =.60=

   =D.D.= =For Worm Diseases; eradicates them= from the system;
          either Bots or Grubs, Long, Round, Pin, or Tape-Worms,
          Colic or emaciation from Worms                           =.60=

   =E.E.= =For Diseases of the Air-passages; Cough=, Influenza,
          Heaves, Broken Wind or Whistles, Thick Wind, Inflamed
          Lungs with quick panting hard or difficult Breathing     =.60=

   =F.F.= =For Colic, Spasmodic, Wind, or Inflammatory= Colic;
          Belly-ache; Gripes, Hoven or Wind Blown; Diarrhea, or
          Dysentery; Liquid or Bloody Dung                         =.60=

   =G.G.= =To prevent Miscarriage, Casting of Foal or Calf=,
          arrest Hemorrhage; throw off the afterbirth              =.60=

   =H.H.= =For Diseases of the Kidneys, Bladder=, or Urinary
          Passages; as Inflammation, or Scanty; difficult,
          painful, suppressed, or bloody Urination; Kidney Colic   =.60=

   =I.I.= =For Cutaneous Diseases or Eruptions=, Grease, Thrush,
          Swellings, Abscesses, Fistulas, Ulcers, Unhealthy Skin,
          Rough Coat                                               =.60=

   =J.K.= =For Diseases of Digestion, Out of Condition=, and “Off
 Formerly his Feed”; Results of Over-Feed, Jaundice or Yellows;
     J.J. Ill Condition, Staring Coat; also, Paralysis, Stomach
          Staggers, Brittle Hoofs                                  =.60=

                        STABLE CHART MAILED FREE

                   Humphreys’ Homeo. Medicine Company
                  Cor. William and Ann Sts., New York




                      Medicines by Mail or Express

                    ☞FIRST APPLY AT YOUR DRUG STORE


  Dr. Humphreys’ Remedies, from a single vial to a full case or box,
  sent prepaid to any address on receipt of price.

  Send post office money order, express money order, or register the
  letter for safety.


              CHANGE IN POST OFFICE REGULATIONS NOW ALLOW

                          PARCEL POST C. O. D.

If you cannot obtain from your druggist any article mentioned in this
book—we will send it C. O. D. (collect on delivery) by Parcel Post.

                HUMPHREYS’ HOMEOPATHIC MEDICINE COMPANY

                 Corner William and Ann Sts., New York


                          BEWARE OF IMITATIONS

They are DEAR AT ANY PRICE, always a delusion and a snare, sure at some
time to leave you in the lurch. Imitations are UTTERLY UNRELIABLE IN
PRACTICE, and are only made to sell upon the reputation of the original.
The few cents saved in the price of a bottle, often costs the life of a
valuable animal. It it is worth using at all, it is worth getting the
original and best, instead of an imitation. You are only safe in buying
HUMPHREYS’ VETERINARY REMEDIES, properly =Labeled, Lettered and with
Name and Trade Mark blown in Bottle. None others are GENUINE or WORTHY
of the LEAST CONFIDENCE.= ☞EVERY EXTENSIVE DEALER OR BREEDER WHO HAS FOR
ANY CONSIDERABLE TIME USED THESE IMITATIONS HAS LOST VALUABLE STOCK IN
CONSEQUENCE.

                                              F. HUMPHREYS, M. D., V. S.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed bold font in =equals=.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74524 ***
